
1

Applied Disability Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
#ADST 3P82
A History of Disability Technologies
(also offered as HIST 3P82)
Cultural, scientific and medical roots of disability technologies from 1850 to the present. Historical examination of how ability technologies reveal individual experiences with disability as well as related notions of citizenship, gender, sexuality, identity and accessibility.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
ADST 4P00
Foundations in Applied Disability Studies
Introduction to a broad spectrum of disability studies and literature authored by persons with disabilities.
Online.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.5 credits and permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADST 6P00.
ADST 4P50
Disability and Society
Theoretical, philosophical and practical issues facing persons with disabilities examined from a strengths-based model emphasizing diversity, identity and empowerment.
Online.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.5 credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ADST 4P00 (6P00).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADST 6P50.
ADST 4P85
Critical Qualitative Design Applications
Exploration, examination, and application of critical, reflective practice in qualitative research emphasizing patterns and distinctions across theoretical and typological foundations of qualitative inquiry.
Online.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.5 credits and permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADST 6P85.
ADST 4P90
Applied Behaviour Analysis Across the Lifespan I
Introduction to the science of applied behaviour analysis (ABA) as applied to persons with disabilities, their families, caregivers and teachers.
Online.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.5 credits and permission of the Department.
Note: students may not concurrently register in CHYS 3P47.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADST 6P90 and CHYS 3P47.
ADST 4P91
Applied Behaviour Analysis Across the Lifespan II
Further study in applied behaviour analysis (ABA) emphasizing interpretation and critical analysis of ABA research, and use of behaviour analytic framework as applied to effective interventions for people with disabilities.
Online.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.5 credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ADST 4P90 (6P90) or permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADST 6P91.
ADST 4P95
Research Methods in Applied Disability Studies
Overview of quantitative and qualitative approaches, methodologies, and designs used in research relating to or including persons with disabilities.
Online.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.5 credits and permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADST 6P95.
ADST 4P96
Directed Studies in Applied Disability Studies I
Experiential learning through program of study or research practicum, designed in consultation with the faculty member, that is not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.5 overall credits and permission of the instructor and the Department.
Note: offered online. Arrangements must be agreed upon with the instructor and the department prior to registration.
ADST 4P97
Directed Studies in Applied Disability Studies II
Experiential learning through program of study or research practicum, designed in consultation with the faculty member, that is not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: permission of the instructor and the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ADST 4P96.
Note: offered online. Arrangements must be agreed upon with the instructor and the department prior to registration.
Administrative Assistant
Brandy Sokoloski
905-688-5550, extension 5987
TH 146B
brocku.ca/ads
The vision of the Department of Applied Disability Studies is to be an internationally-recognized, pre-eminent academic Department that contributes to the betterment of the lives of people in our community and beyond, focusing on persons with disabilities and under served populations.
The mission of the Department of Applied Disability Studies is to educate students who will be agents of change to help better the lives of people in our community and beyond, focusing on persons with disabilities and under served populations. We strive to improve services and contribute to knowledge by conducting cutting edge basic and applied research, and by providing transdisciplinary, quality postgraduate education to the next generation of professionals, researchers, educators and to experienced professionals in the field. Faculty are internationally respected in disabilities and applied behaviour analysis, and students will be able to design a stimulating program of study that meets their current and future interests and career aspirations.
Undergraduate elective courses in applied disability studies are open to all students who have completed 12.5 credits at the time of registration. These elective options will be of particular interest to students who wish to pursue careers in disability related fields, Applied Behaviour Analysis or wish to continue in postgraduate education.

2

Applied Linguistics
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ACADEMIC ENGLISH AS SUBSEQUENT LANGUAGE COURSE
AESL 1P92
Advanced English for Subsequent Language Learners
Development and refinement of English language proficiency, reading and writing skills for preparation of academic essays and presentations, citation strategies for appropriate reference to sources, speaking and listening skills for in-class participation, discussion leadership and oral presentations.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Level 5 IELP BAcc and BBA students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to all Level 5 IELP graduates and other students as specified by the Office of the Registrar with permission of the Chair.
Note: open to students whose first language is not English.
LINGUISTICS COURSES
LING 1F25
The Study of Language
Readings and discussion regarding language study past and present, including the study of language and its relation to thought. Form, meaning, and use of language as examined variously from one time and place to another. Role of language study in the discussion of a range of social phenomena and issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS, HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LING 1P94.
LING 1P00
American Sign Language I
Basic signing vocabulary and grammar, including a brief history of sign language. Focus on basic finger spelling, ASL terminology, expressive and receptive vocabulary, sentence structure, and conversational signs. Examination of issues in deaf culture. Introduces the Direct Experience method.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS, HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
LING 1P01
American Sign Language II
Advanced structures, including the manual alphabet, finger spelling, and American Sign Language vocabulary and grammar. Emphasis on mastery of advanced expressive and receptive vocabulary. Ongoing debates in deaf culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS, HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P00.
Note: conducted entirely in ASL.
LING 1P92
Introduction to the Psychology of Language
Contemporary theories of psycholinguistics. Critical appraisal of the defining features of 'language', research on linguistics and the brain, theories of socio-cultural influences on language and of typical language acquisition.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS, HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA Honours/BEd (Primary/Junior), HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: this course is of interest to students in education, behavioural and social sciences, health sciences and to students intending to pursue subsequent professional training in speech-language pathology or audiology.
LING 1P93
Introduction to Communication Disorders
Critical appraisal of contemporary theories and research concerning atypical speech, language and hearing development and of acquired disorders of speech, language and hearing. Topics include differentiation of communication disorder from communication difference, articulation and phonological disorders, language disorders of children and adults, stuttering and hearing loss.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS, HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA Honours/BEd (Primary/Junior), HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: this course is of interest to students in education, behavioural and social sciences, health sciences and to students intending to pursue subsequent professional training in speech-language pathology or audiology. May be offered online.
LING 1P94
Introduction to General Linguistics I
Phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, and classification of human languages.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS, HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA Honours/BEd (Primary/Junior), HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: relevant to students interested in the structure and meaning of English and other languages, and particularly to those contemplating careers in language teaching, literary studies, translation, psycholinguistics, speech-language pathology and audiology.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LING 1F94. May be offered online.
LING 1P95
Introduction to General Linguistics II
Cross-disciplinary areas in linguistics: language acquisition, language variation and change, language and society, language processing in the mind and brain.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS, HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA Honours/BEd (Primary/Junior), HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94.
Note: may be taken concurrently with LING 1P94. Relevant to students interested in the structure and meaning of English and other languages, and particularly to those contemplating careers in language teaching, literary studies, translation, psycholinguistics, speech-language pathology and audiology.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LING 1F94.
LING 2P01
American Sign Language III
Further development of conversational fluency and comprehension in American Sign Language and continued examination of deaf culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P01.
Note: conducted entirely in ASL.
LING 2P02
American Sign Language IV
Advanced American Sign Language vocabulary and grammar, emphasizing mastery of advanced expressive and receptive vocabulary. Ongoing debates in deaf culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 2P01.
Note: conducted entirely in ASL.
LING 2P10
Fundamentals of English Grammar
Introductory description of English grammar focusing on basic principles and terminology.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: this course is relevant to the needs of those embarking on the linguistic study of English, to current or prospective teachers or teaching assistants and foreign language students.
LING 2P50
Phonetics
Study of human speech sounds, including their articulatory, auditory, and acoustic properties. Laboratory exercises in transcription, production and auditory discrimination.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLCS and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94 (1F94) or permission of the Chair.
Note: LING 1P94 may be taken concurrently.
LING 2P51
Applied Phonetics
Application of descriptive and articulatory phonetics to speech sound perception and production in first and subsequent languages. This includes developing a foundational knowledge of how speech perception and production develop, and distinctions between speech disorders and foreign accents. It also includes the development of phonetic transcription skills to the analysis of speech sounds produced by a variety of speakers, including subsequent language speakers.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 2P50.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LING 3P51.
LING 2P72
Sociolinguistics
Language in its social context: bilingualism and linguistic variation; social factors that interact with language; cultural implications of language learning and language behaviour.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P72.
LING 2P90
Anatomy and Physiology of Speech and Swallowing
Structural and functional bases of respiration, phonation and articulation for the production of speech and voice. Introduction to physiological measurement and theories of speech breathing and phonation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single and combined) majors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: may be offered online.
LING 2P91
Acoustic and Physiological Phonetics
Acoustic, physiological and perceptual characteristics of speech. Simple and complex waveforms, acoustic phonetic features of vowels, semi-vowels and consonants, source-filter theory, airflow, air pressure and other physiological measurements of speech and voice production. Theories and models of speech motor control and speech perception.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 2P50 and 2P90.
LING 2P93
Language and Power
Relations between language use and the attainment of power in society. Topics may include examining differences in language related to age, gender, race, politics, news and social media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*LING 2P99
Literacy in Childhood and Youth
(also offered as CHYS 2P99)
Exploration of selected issues in literacy development. Topics may include reading, writing, the impact of information technology on literacy development in the Canadian or global context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94 (1F94), or PSYC 1F90.
Note: LING 1P94 may be taken concurrently.
LING 3P53
Phonology
Further study of speech sounds and how they pattern in languages, focusing on the analysis of data from a wide variety of languages.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 2P50
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LING 2P53.
*LING 3P61
Child Language Acquisition: Early Stages
(also offered as CHYS 3P61 and PSYC 3P61)
Theories, research and methods in early language development. Linguistic stages in the development of child language at the level of grammar and meaning (phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94 or PSYC 1F90.
Note: LING 1P94 may be taken concurrently. LING 1P94 and 1P95 (1F94) recommended.
LING 3P71
Syntax
Syntactic analysis focusing on the description of English, including basic concepts, categories, rules and principles and relevant analytical techniques.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94, 1P95 (1F94) and 2P10 or permission of the Chair.
#LING 3P80
Comparative Analysis of Romance Languages
(also offered as SCLC 3P80)
Grammatical structures of Romance languages from a contrastive perspective.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SCLC 2P95 (2P80) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
LING 3P90
Language Disorders in Children and Youth
Theories and methods of assessment and intervention concerning developmental and acquired disorders of language in children and youth.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 3P61 or permission of the Chair.
LING 3P91
Materials and Curriculum Design
Theoretical foundations, development and/or adaptation of subsequent language syllabi; planning, managing, and delivering subsequent language instruction in various methodological frameworks, including materials assessment and needs analysis.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ALTS majors and TESC Certificate students.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94, 1P95 (1F94) and 3Q91.
Note: LING 1P94, 1P95 and 3Q91 may be taken concurrently.
*LING 3P93
Gender and Language
(also offered as WGST 3P93)
Role of language in the construction and maintenance of contemporary masculinities and femininities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
LING 3P94
Semantics and Pragmatics
Linguistic meaning and speaker meaning examined through comparison of major theoretical frameworks and application of analytic techniques to relevant data.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94, 1P95 (1F94) and 2P10 or permission of the Chair.
LING 3P95
Discourse Analysis
Textual and contextual analysis of discourse in terms of language variation, cohesion and coherence, topicality and schematic knowledge. Application of discourse theories to such domains as literary analysis and language acquisition. Collection, transcription and analysis of data.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94, 1P95 (1F94) and 2P10 or permission of the Chair.
LING 3P97
Introduction to Audiology
Review of anatomy and physiology of hearing. Hearing disorders from a lifespan perspective (preschool to older adult populations). Approaches to prevention, assessment and treatment.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P93 and 2P91 or permission of the Chair.
*LING 3Q91
Subsequent Language Acquisition and Learning
(also offered as PSYC 3Q91)
Theories of subsequent-language learning. Topics include psychological aspects of language learning (behaviourism, cognitivism, humanism), language and culture, contrastive analysis, error analysis, and interlanguage.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
LING 3Q93
Introduction to Neurolinguistics
Theories of neurolinguistics and human neuroanatomy. Brain-language relationships and adult-onset neurogenic disorders of language processing and production.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors, APLI, CHYS, PSYC minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P92 or PSYC 1F90.
Note: LING 1P92 may be taken concurrently.
LING 3V80-3V99
Special Issues in Applied Linguistics
Selected issues in the theory and/or practice of linguistics. Topics according to specific areas of instructional expertise.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
LING 4F01
Honours Thesis
Research project carried out with faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single and combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: students must consult the Chair and an adviser before being admitted to the course.
LING 4P10
Topics in Subsequent Language Acquisition and Learning
Critical examination of current theories in subsequent language acquisition and learning and applications to practice worldwide. Topics may include cognitive mechanisms and social factors (e.g., individuals and language identity) in subsequent language acquisition and learning, speech communities, interlanguage, and issues in subsequent language policy and planning.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours), and SLSC and TESC Certificate students.
LING 4P11
Reflective Practice
Examination of how practitioners in a variety of disciplines can subject their professional principles and practices to systematic critical analysis using reflective practice tools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
LING 4P20
Evaluation of Speech and Language Disorders
Principles and procedures of clinical evaluation in speech-language pathology from initial referral to report writing. Topics include clinical interviewing, psychometric properties of norm-referenced tests, instrumental and other forms of measurement and ethical and cultural considerations for assessing speech, voice and language disorders across the lifespan.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to HEAR and SPLS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours), HESC and SLSC Certificate students and combined Applied Linguistics majors.
LING 4P21
Clinical Analysis of Communication Disorders
Case-based video analysis of selected disorders of speech, language, hearing and/or swallowing. Covers assessment and intervention.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to HEAR and SPLS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours), HESC and SLSC Certificate students and combined Applied Linguistics majors.
Note: may be scheduled off-campus.
LING 4P25
Research Practicum
Supervised participation in faculty-directed research projects.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 and permission of the Chair.
Note: students must have a faculty adviser who is willing to supervise before they can be admitted to the course. Completion of a learning journal, a reflective paper, data collection or analysis assignments or collaboration in the production of a conference presentation or journal article is required.
LING 4P27
Assistive Listening Devices and Aural Rehabilitation
Acoustics and psychoacoustics of hearing. Review of anatomy and physiology of the ear. Electroacoustic characteristics and maintenance of a variety of assistive listening devices. Principles and methods of aural rehabilitation.
Lectures, seminar/lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HEAR and SPLS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours), HESC and SLSC Certificate students and combined Applied Linguistics majors.
Prerequisite(s): LING 3P97.
LING 4P28
Research Methods in Applied Linguistics
Design, implementation, and analysis of research that answers questions about language use. Evaluation of the effectiveness of language instruction and intervention in second language learning and speech, language and hearing sciences.
Lecture, Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours), SLSC and TESC Certificate students and permission of the Chair.
LING 4P40
Language Testing
Theories and practices of language testing in research and teaching. Focus on critical analysis and evaluation of psychometric and pragmatic tests through item analysis and/or latent trait measurement.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours), and TESC Certificate students.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94 and 1P95 (1F94) or permission of the Chair.
LING 4P41
Bilingualism
Linguistic and constraints on mixing and code-switching, the organization of the bilingual lexicon, language processing in bilinguals, language attrition.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94 and 1P95 (1F94), or PSYC 1F90.
LING 4P45
Research Issues in Applied Linguistics
Critical examination and application of current linguistic theories. Topics may include the analysis of language in relation to ethnicity, class and power in institutional and other social settings (sociolinguistics), in relation to language teaching or in relation to other applied linguistics domains.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours), SLSC and TESC Certificate students and permission of the Chair.
LING 4P80
Supervised Teaching
Classroom observation, and planning, managing and delivering subsequent language instruction. Discussions on current conceptual knowledge (theoretical) and perceptual knowledge (practical) highlighted with reference to the subsequent language teaching and learning context.
Restriction: open to ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and TESC Certificate students and permission of the Chair.
Note: placements for observations and practice teaching.
LING 4P81
Reflective Practicum
Supervised class observation of lesson planning, teaching and evaluation. Issues related to subsequent language teaching in diverse contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours), TESC Certificate students and permission of the Chair.
Note: not approved by TESL Ontario as meeting the supervised teaching requirements for TESL Ontario Certification as an adult ESL instructor.
LING 4P82
Teaching Listening and Speaking in a Subsequent Language
Theories of and issues in the development of oral language processing in a subsequent language. Canadian Language Benchmarks. Implications and applications for selected teaching and learning situations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and TESC Certificate students.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94 and 1P95 (1F94) or permission of the Chair.
LING 4P83
Teaching Reading and Writing in a Subsequent Language
Selected theories and models underlying reading and writing ability. Their relationship to the concept of grammar and influence on inter-language development. Canadian Language Benchmarks. Implications and applications for selected teaching and learning situations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ALTS and APLI (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and TESC Certificate students.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94 and 1P95 (1F94) or permission of the Chair.
LING 4P87
Communication and Aging
Critical analysis of the physical, cognitive and social factors that impact on communication during adult aging. Topics may include the Communication Predicament Model of Aging, demographics of aging, dementia, and other chronic and/or degenerative conditions or diseases that affect communication during the aging process.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LING 1P94, 1P95 (1F94), 3Q93 and PSYC 1F90 or permission of the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LING 4V87.
LING 4P99
Honours Tutorial
Individual topic, directed readings and/or student research chosen in consultation with a faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined) majors, and ALTS majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, approval to year 4 and permission of the Chair.
#LING 4Q80
Historical Romance Linguistics
(also offered as MLLC 4Q80)
Factors affecting language change: internal history (sounds and inflection) and external forces (politics and society). Methods and theories applied to the historical study of Romance linguistics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 3P80; one of MLLC 3V80-3V89; one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MLLC 4P80.
LING 4V80-4V86
Advanced Topics in Applied Linguistics/Teaching English as a Subsequent Language
Selected topics in applied linguistics/teaching English as a subsequent language. Topics may vary according to specific faculty interest and expertise.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APLI (single or combined) and ALTS majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
LING 4V87-4V93
Advanced Topics in Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences
Selected topics in speech, language and hearing sciences related to specific faculty interest and expertise.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HEAR, SPLS (single and combined) with approval to year 4 (honours), and HESC and SLSC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
LING 4V94-4V99
Advanced Topics in Applied Linguistics
Selected topics in language acquisition, psycholinguistics or other applied linguistics fields related to specific faculty interest and expertise.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ALTS, APLI (single or combined), HEAR and SPLS (single and combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours), and HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
LING 4V95
2021-2022: Introduction to Forensic Linguistics
Examination of how language is used in and by the legal system, including speaker/voice recognition, authorship, police interrogations, courtroom discourse, language science in expert testimony.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ALTS, APLI (single or combined), HEAR and SPLS (single andcombined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours), and HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
NON-CREDIT COURSE
LING 4N01
Academic and Cultural Orientation in Applied Linguistics
Foundations and development of advanced academic skills in library research, note-taking, essay writing, seminar and workshop presentations, based on concepts and terminology in Applied Linguistics. Guidance in individual and group assignments. Familiarization with and use of electronic library databases and other e-resources.
Note: intended for Bridged students.
Administrative Assistant
Arlene Arch
905-688-5550, extension 3374
Mackenzie Chown D450F
brocku.ca/appliedling@brocku.ca
At Brock University, Applied Linguistics involves the application of linguistic theories and methods of linguistic analysis in such areas as first or subsequent language acquisition, psycholinguistics, language teaching methodology, and speech, language and hearing sciences.
Linguistics focuses on language structure, first- and subsequent-language acquisition, the role of language in communication, and languages as products of cultures and other social groups. Linguists may or may not specialize in particular languages. Typically, they analyze similarities and differences among languages; such analyses can be used to develop, support or refute linguistic theories.
Linguistics provides an opportunity to apply scientific reasoning to language-based problem solving. A background in linguistics is essential for language teachers, translators, speech-language pathologists, audiologists and many other language professionals. Additionally, linguistic knowledge can provide a valuable foundation for human interaction and communication in a wide variety of fields.
The Department of Applied Linguistics offers programs of study leading to Honours Bachelor of Arts (BA) degrees in Applied Linguistics/Teaching English as a Second Language, Speech Language and Hearing Sciences. Students completing the Honours Speech Language and Hearing Sciences degree select a specialized concentration in either Hearing Sciences or Speech and Language Sciences after Year 1.
The Department also offers a four-year program of study leading to a BA with Major in Speech Language and Hearing Sciences, Pass BA degrees in Applied Linguistics, and Speech Language and Hearing Sciences and Certificates in Speech Language and Hearing Sciences, and Teaching English as a Second Language as well as a Minor in Applied Linguistics.
Skills-development courses in American Sign Language and Academic English as a Subsequent Language are also offered.

3

Biochemistry
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
BIOCHEMISTRY COURSES
BCHM 3P01
Metabolic Biochemistry
Biochemical energetics, kinetic regulation of metabolic pathways. Carbon metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins; nitrogen metabolism.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week for six weeks.
Restriction: open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL(Honours)/BEd(Intermediate/Senior), BMED, BTEC, NBIO, NEUN, NEUR, NMTR, NPSY and OEVI majors until date specified in Registration Guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02, 2P03 (2F01) and CHEM 2P20.
Note: materials fee required.
BCHM 3P02
Protein Structure and Function
Connection between protein structure and function. Topics include protein databases and informatics, protein evolution, 3-D structure modeling and visualization, enzyme kinetics, protein engineering, and proteomics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01).
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#BCHM 3P25
Wine Chemistry
(also offered as OEVI 3P25)
Sugars, acids, nitrogenous compounds in grape juice; antimicrobial and antioxidant activity of sulphur dioxide; must adjustments; biochemistry of alcoholic and malo-lactic fermentation; bitartrate and protein stability; fining agents; wine aging and phenolic oxidation.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BTEC, OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02, 2P03 (2F01), CHEM 2P20 and 2P42.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. It is strongly recommended that students take BCHM 3P01 prior to or concurrent with OEVI (BCHM) 3P25.
*BCHM 4P03
Current Topics in Photobiology
(also offered as BIOL 4P03)
The interaction of light with biological molecules. Effects of ultraviolet radiation, photosynthesis, vision and photoregulation of genes and proteins.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BMED, BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one-half BCHM credit numbered 3(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#BCHM 4P06
Bioinformatics
(also offered as BIOL 4P06 and BTEC 4P06)
Sequence analysis, phylogeny, databases and tools, functional genomics, genome project basic bioinformatics programming.
Lecture, seminar, computer lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50, 3P51 or permission of the instructor.
Note: BIOL 2P05, BCHM 3P02 and MATH/STAT 1P98 are recommended.
*BCHM 4P08
Topics in Plant and Microbial Biotechnology
(also offered as BIOL 4P08 and BTEC 4P08)
Characterization of biochemical processes and structures. Genetic modification of such processes and structures through molecular manipulation to meet scientific and/or societal needs. Examples include yeast and microbial enzymes or enzyme systems as well as crop proteins and enzymes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BMED, BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BCHM 3P01, 3P02, BIOL 2P94, 3P50, CHEM 3P93 or permission of the instructor.
#BCHM 4P11
Theory of Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
(also offered as BIOL 4P11 and BTEC 4P11)
Theory behind basic and some advanced techniques in nucleic acid and protein manipulations and analysis.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BMED, BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overalls credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50.
#BCHM 4P41
Human Molecular Genetics
(also offered as BIOL 4P41, BTEC 4P41 and HLSC 4P41)
Principles of human genetics, human genome organization, pedigree, disease gene mapping, forensic and cancer genetics, genome sequencing, personal genomics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50 or 3P51.
#BCHM 4P67
Biophysical Techniques
(also offered as BTEC 4P67 and CHEM 4P67)
Modern instrumental methods of biotechnology emphasizing understanding theory. Development of newer technologies which utilize biological components. Topics include optical, X-ray and NMR techniques, separation techniques, hybridization assays, immunoassays, biosensors and mass spectral techniques; membrane chemistry.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21 and 2P63 or permission of the instructor.
CO-OP COURSES
BCHM 0N01
Work Placement 1
First Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
BCHM 0N02
Work Placement II
Second Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
BCHM 0N03
Work Placement III
Third Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
BCHM 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
BCHM 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
BCHM 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BCHM 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BCHM 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BCHM 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BCHM 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BCHM 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BCHM 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BCHM 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BCHM 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCHM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BCHM 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistant
Leslie Wenzl
905-688-5550, extension 3388
Mackenzie Chown F234
brocku.ca/biochemistry
Biochemistry describes the structure, organization and function of living systems in molecular terms. The goals of biochemistry are to identify the chemical components and molecules (such as DNA, RNA and protein) of living cells and to determine the function of each component, how components interact, how they are integrated into biological systems, and how these components affect the overall functions of cells and living systems. The Biochemistry Program is a broadly based program designed to provide the student with a thorough understanding of living systems from a molecular perspective. The program is run jointly by the Departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry.
The Biochemistry Co-op program combines academic and work terms over a five-year period. Students spend two years in an academic setting studying the fundamentals of Biochemistry prior to their first work placement. Successful completion of courses in the core areas of Biochemistry provides the necessary academic background for the work experience. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, Biochemistry Co-op students are assessed an administrative fee for each work term (see the Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue in the Biochemistry Co-op program is based on the student's major and non-major averages. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average may continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Biochemistry Co-op program, but may continue in the non co-op Biochemistry stream. If a student subsequently raises his/her major average to 70 percent, the student may be re-admitted only if approved by the Co-op Admissions Committee. For further information, see the Co-op Programs section of the Calendar, and contact the Departments of Biological Sciences or Chemistry.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Programs Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Program Office.
The Biochemistry Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have honours standing and who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience.

4

Biological Sciences
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
BIOL 1F25
Biology: A Human Perspective
Contemporary issues of human concern; genetics and biology of cancer and obesity; learning, memory and addiction.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; on-line lab, alternate weeks.
Restriction: not open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BION, BMED, OEVI, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC, CAST, CHEM (single or combined), CHEM (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), CHEN, COSN, COSC (single or combined), COBU, CNET, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS (single or combined), GAMP, MATH (single or combined), MATH (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), NEUN, NEUR, PHYN, PHYS (single or combined) and PHYS (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: secondary school biology is not a prerequisite for this course. For non-science majors. Major credit will not be granted to Biochemistry or Biological Sciences majors and may not be used to satisfy a teachable subject credit for Biology for the Intermediate/Senior programs at Brock.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 1P23 and BIOL 1P24.
BIOL 1P23
Cancer: A Human Perspective
Contemporary issues concerning cancer in people. Topics may include cancer incidence, properties of cancerous and non-cancerous cells, discovery of genes that contribute to cancer, how genes contribute to cancer, inherited predisposition to cancer and environmental factors contributing to cancer incidence.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, alternative weeks.
Restriction: not open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BION, BMED, OEVI, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC, CAST, CHEM (single or combined), CHEM (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), CHEN, COSN, COSC (single or combined), COBU, CNET, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS (single or combined), GAMP, MATH (single or combined), MATH (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), NEUN, NEUR, PHYN, PHYS (single or combined) and PHYS (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: offered online. Secondary school biology is not a prerequiste for this course. For non-science majors. Major credit will not be granted to Biochemistry or Biological Sciences majors and may not be used to satisfy a teachable subject credit for Biology for the Intermediate/Senior programs at Brock.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 1F25.
BIOL 1P24
Learning and Memory: A Human Perspective
Contemporary issues of the brain and central nervous system in people with a specific focus on learning and memory. Topics may include electrical properties of brain cells, how brain cells communicate with one another, how synapses in the brain change during learning and memory, links between learning and memory and drug abuse and synaptic changes in various neurodegenerative diseases.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, alternative weeks.
Restriction: not open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BION, BMED, OEVI, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC, CAST, CHEM (single or combined), CHEM (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), CHEN, COSN, COSC (single or combined), COBU, CNET, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS (single or combined), GAMP, MATH (single or combined), MATH (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), NEUN, NEUR, PHYN, PHYS (single or combined) and PHYS (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: offered online. Secondary school biology is not a prerequiste for this course. For non-science majors. Major credit will not be granted to Biochemistry or Biological Sciences majors and may not be used to satisfy a teachable subject credit for Biology for the Intermediate/Senior programs at Brock.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 1F25.
BIOL 1P27
Human Impact on Ecosystem Imbalances
Current issues illustrating human impact and environmental consequences. Topics may include dynamic nature of biochemical cycles, ecosystem energetics and ecosystem imbalances.
Restriction: not open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BION, BMED, OEVI, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC, CAST, CHEM (single or combined), CHEM (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), CHEN, COSN, COSC (single or combined), COBU, CNET, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS (single or combined), GAMP, MATH (single or combined), MATH (honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), NEUN, NEUR, PHYN, PHYS (single or combined) and PHYS (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: offered online. Secondary school biology is not a prerequisite for this course. For non-science majors. Major credit will not be granted to Biochemistry or Biological Sciences majors and may not be used to satisfy a teachable subject credit for Biology for the Intermediate/Senior programs at Brock.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 1F26.
BIOL 1P28
Human Impact on Environmental Sustainability
Current issues illustrating human impact on the environment. Topics may include climate change, GMO food sources, acid rain and bio-remediation.
Restriction: not open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BION, BMED, OEVI, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC, CAST, CHEM (single or combined), CHEM (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), CHEN, COSN, COSC (single or combined), COBU, CNET, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS (single or combined), GAMP, MATH (single or combined), MATH (honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), NEUN, NEUR, PHYN, PHYS (single or combined) and PHYS (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: offered online.Secondary school biology is not a prerequisite for this course. For non-science majors. Major credit will not be granted to Biochemistry or Biological Sciences majors and may not be used to satisfy a teachable subject credit for Biology for the Intermediate/Senior programs at Brock.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 1F26.
BIOL 1P91
Introduction to Biology I
Chemical basis of life, macromolecules, membrane structure, biological energy conversion, nucleic acid structure and DNA replication, gene expression and genetics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/workshop, alternating weeks, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, ERSC (single or combined), NEUR, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BIOL (single or combined), BCHM, BKIN, BMED, BHPY, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), BTEC, CHLH, CMTY, ERSC (single or combined), HEAR, MSCI, NEUR, NURS, OEVI, PHTH, SPLS majors, Sciences (general) and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: 4U/M biology recommended. MATH 1P01 or 1P05 may be substituted for MATH 1P97. BIOL 1P91 is a prerequisite for most courses in the department. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 1F90.
BIOL 1P92
Introduction to Biology II
History of life on earth, micro and macroevolution, taxonomy and systematics, biodiversity, and animal form and function. Examples from all kingdoms of life.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/workshop, alternating weeks, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, ERSC (single or combined), NEUR, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BIOL (single or combined), BCHM, BKIN, BMED, BHPY, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), BTEC, CHLH, CMTY, ERSC (single or combined), HEAR, MSCI, NEUR, NURS, OEVI, PHTH, SPLS majors, Sciences (general) and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: 4U/M biology recommended. MATH 1P01 or 1P05 may be substituted for MATH 1P97. BIOL 1P92 is a prerequisite for most courses in the department. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 1F90.
BIOL 1P96
Fundamental Skills in Biological Sciences
Practical skills for higher education. Scientific method, literature research methods, effective communication (oral and written) and math and biostatistic skills.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined) and OEVI majors until date specified in registration guide. After that date open to BIOL (single or combined), BSc (honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): SBI4U and MFH4U.
BIOL 2P02
Introduction to Molecular Biology
Chemical foundations of life, nucleic acids and protein structure and function, techniques for studying macromolecules in cells and tissues, genome structure and evolution, basic molecular genetic mechanisms, eukaryotic gene structure and expression, and bioinformatics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; minimum four 3 hour labs.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90), CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 2F01.
BIOL 2P03
Cell Biology
Structure, function and interactions of cells of eukaryotes. Membrane structure and transmembrane transport, vesicular traffic and secretion, the cytoskeleton, signal transduction, factors affecting cell shape, movement and adhesion, the cell cycle, and stem cells. Emphasis on these processes in embryonic cells as well as in specialized cell types of the immune and nervous systems.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; minimum four 3 hour labs.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90), CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 2F01.
BIOL 2P05
Evolution
The origins and history of life. Evolutionary mechanisms, especially natural selection. Phenotypic and genotypic variation among individuals and related population- and species-level patterns. Population genetics, phenotypic plasticity, life history strategies, molecular evolution, developmental genetics (evo-devo).
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90); MATH 1P97 or MATH/STAT 1P98.
BIOL 2P92
Principles of Zoology
Introduction to animal diversity and the basic body plans of phyla within the animal kingdom. Relationships of structures to such functions as movement, feeding, respiration and development. Evolutionary series illustrated where appropriate.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 2P93
Introduction to Botany
Principles of plant taxonomy, morphology, reproduction and development. Strategies employed by plants in the resolution of habitat limitations and range expansion.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: offered online.
BIOL 2P94
Plant Biology: Growth and Development
Biochemistry and cell biology of plant cell structure, organogenesis and plant life cycle. Focusing on angiosperm adaptations to the biotic and abiotic environment.
Lectures, lab/seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90), CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
#BIOL 2P95
Bioethics
(also offered as PHIL 2P95)
Value conflicts and moral dilemmas in biology and medicine. Emphasis on specific case studies in reproductive interventions, medical experimentation, concepts of "health" and "disease", modification of behaviour, lifestyle choices, allocation of scarce or expensive medical resources, and death and dying.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one BIOL or PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
Note: may count as an elective, but not as a major credit in an Honours BIOL (single or combined) program.
BIOL 2P96
Biology of Fungi
Structure, development, metabolism, reproduction and evolution of fungi, emphasizing the importance of fungi, in particular yeasts, to industrial processes.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week for six weeks.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 2P97
Human Physiology
Normal human function with specific reference to digestive, circulatory, respiratory and excretory activities and their regulation as well as their more common genetic, environmental and lifestyle pathologies.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours alternate weeks.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Students will not receive earned credit for BIOL 2P97 if KINE (PEKN) 1P90 has been successfully completed.
BIOL 2P98
Principles of Microbiology
Diversity, evolution, physiology and genetics of micro-organisms emphasizing applied, medical and environmental microbiology.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours alternate weeks.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 2Q04
Principles of Ecology
Ecological processes at the population, community and ecosystem levels of biological organization; mathematical models of population growth, predation and competition; factors influencing community structure, landscapes, biodiversity and ecosystems.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91, 1P92 (1F90) and BIOL 1P96.
Note: materials fee required. MATH/STAT 1F92 or MATH/STAT 1P98 may be taken in place of BIOL 1P96 (with permission of the instructor).
#BIOL 3P03
Paleontology and Paleobiology
(also offered as ERSC 3P03)
Biodiversity and ecosystems through geologic time, micro and macro evolution in paleobiology and evolutionary biology, large scale environmental change and the fossil record, functional morphology, and phylogenetic and cladistic analysis of the fossil record.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 2P05, 2Q04, ERSC 2P03.
BIOL 3P28
Developmental Biology
Principles of vertebrate and invertebrate development. Topics include life cycles and the evolution of developmental patterns; the genetic core of development; differential gene expression; cell-cell communication; fertilization; early development and axial specification in selected vertebrates and invertebrates.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week for 6 weeks.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01).
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 3P30
Cell Physiology
Molecular physiology of non-excitable membranes, mechanisms of cellular response and adaptation, control and regulation of cell metabolism; molecular basis of cellular dysfunction in human aging and disease.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, NEUR, BTEC majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01).
*BIOL 3P34
Neurobiology
(also offered as NEUR 3P34)
Structure and function of nerve cells: Electrical properties of neurons, synaptic function and transmitters, neural plasticity and cellular basis of behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), NEUR majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01).
*BIOL 3P43
Applied Microbiology
(also offered as BTEC 3P43)
Ecology of micro-organisms and special adaptations that permit their use in biotechnology and applied microbiology.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P98 or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
*BIOL 3P50
Molecular Genetics
(also offered as BTEC 3P50)
Topics include the genetic code and information flow from nucleic acids to proteins, RNA and protein synthesis; prokaryotic and eukaryotic chromosomes; gene organization; transcription, RNA processing; codon usage; enhancer and transposons.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week for 6 weeks.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
*BIOL 3P51
Principles of Genetic Inheritance
(also offered as HLSC 3P51)
Concepts of classical genetics including Mendelian inheritance,  genetic mapping, extra-nuclear inheritance, chromosome transmission, polyploidy and population genetics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week for 6 weeks.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 3P60
Animal Behaviour
Social context of behaviour and natural selection: the evolution and significance of visual, auditory and olfactory communication; spacing behaviour and the evolution of diversity in spacing systems; mating systems and sexual selection; development of species-typical behaviour; the development and significance of periodic behaviour patterns including endogenous rhythms orientation and navigation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSC Integrated Studies (Honours)BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P05; BIOL 2P92 or 2Q04.
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 3P64
Introductory Insect Biology
Field and laboratory exercises and lectures covering morphology, physiology, evolution, ecology, social behaviour and harmful and beneficial aspects of the insects.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week; plus fieldwork.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90) or permission of instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 3P71
Ontario Universities Field Biology Course
Inter-university selections from the offerings of the Ontario Universities Program in Field Biology.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the course co-ordinator.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P05 and 2Q04.
Note: takes place at different field sites from May through August for 1 or 2 weeks durations. Registrants must submit an application with the course co-ordinator by the end of January. See course co-ordinator for application. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
BIOL 3P72
Ontario Universities Field Ecology Course
Further field studies for students who have completed BIOL 3P71.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the course co-ordinator.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P05 and 2Q04.
Note: takes place at different field sites from May through August for 1 or 2 weeks durations. Registrants must submit an application with the course co-ordinator by the end of January. See course co-ordinator for application. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#BIOL 3P85
Ecology of a Changing Planet
(also offered as ERSC 3P85 and GEOG 3P85)
Impact of environmental change and human activity on ecosystems. Topics include climate change and global warming, habitat fragmentation, extinction, invasive species, conservation biology and the management of ecological integrity.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 2P05, 2Q04, (ERSC 2P09), GEOG 3P09 (2P09).
*BIOL 3P90
Investigative Neurobiology
(also offered as NEUR 3P90)
Methods used in neurobiology and neurophysiology. Electro-physiological techniques, including intracellular and extracellular recording from nerve cells and muscle, and on theory and techniques for electro-physiological data acquisition. Other topics include intracellular staining, immunocytochemistry and assay procedures.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01), or PSYC 2P36 and 2P37.
Note: BIOL 3P34 is strongly recommended for students who have not taken PSYC 2P36 and 2P37. Materials fee required.
BIOL 3P91
Plant Physiology: Metabolic and Biophysical Processes
Metabolism of carbon and nitrogen compounds; photosynthetic and respiratory processes; mineral nutrition; water relations; gas exchange and transport processes.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02, 2P03 (2F01) and 2P94 or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
BIOL 3P92
Advanced Developmental Biology
Post-embryonic development, metamorphosis, regeneration and aging, plant development, medical implications of developmental biology, environmental regulation of development, and developmental mechanisms of evolutionary change.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P28.
BIOL 3P93
Histology
Introduction to microscopy and histologic specimen preparation. Emphasis on the simulated microscopic examination of epithelial cell types, connective tissue, muscular tissue, nervous tissue and tissues of the gastrointestinal, respiratory, endocrine, and lymphatic systems in humans and other vertebrates.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; minimum four 3 hour labs.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL(Honours)/BEd(Intermediate/Senior), and BMED students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P03.
Note: BIOL 2P02, 2P92 and 2P97 are recommended.
BIOL 3P95
Comparative Animal Physiology
How animals work, survive and regulate physiological processes emphasizing energetics. Homeostatic mechanisms of respiration, circulation, osmoregulation, thermoregulation, locomotion and metabolism in vertebrates with select comparisons.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02, 2P03 (2F01) and 2P92.
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in BIOL 3P35.
BIOL 3P96
Biometrics
Introduction to the principles of experimental design and data analysis. Emphasis on practice in research planning, sampling, data collection, analyzing and interpreting biological data from a variety of different fields (molecular biology, physiology, neurobiology, ecology).
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P96 or permission of the instructor; one credit from BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01), 2P05, 2Q04.
Note: recommended for students planning to take BIOL 4F90 and 4F91. Materials fee required.
BIOL 3P97
Molecular Ecology
Review of population genetics and the use of molecular markers; the application of molecular genetic data to issues and problems in evolutionary biology, population genetics, and animal behaviour, including phylogenetics, kinship and population subdivision.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; computer labs, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR and OEVI majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P05 and 2Q04.
#BIOL 3P98
Wine Microbiology
(also offered as OEVI 3P98)
Identification and enumeration of indigenous micro-organisms in grape must. Alcoholic fermentation; metabolism of nitrogen compounds and organic acids; production of sulphur compounds; killer yeasts; malolactic fermentation; wine spoilage micro-organisms; genetic improvement of wine yeasts.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BCHM, BTEC, OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02, 2P03 (2F01), 2P98 and OEVI 3P25.
Note: students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. It is strongly recommended that students take BIOL 3P50 prior to or concurrent with BIOL 3P98. Materials fee required.
BIOL 3P99
Medical and Veterinary Entomology
Identification, behavioural ecology, evolution, and disease relationships of arthropods affecting the health of humans and domestic animals. Examination of empirical studies in the current literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91, 1P92 (1F90), 2P02, 2P03 (2F01) and 2P05.
BIOL 4F90
Honours Thesis
Each student will undertake a limited research project involving field or laboratory study under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to BCHM and BIOL (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours), a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the Chair.
Note: to be taken in conjunction with BIOL 4F91. Students electing to pursue studies on non-laboratory ecological projects will be permitted to initiate their programs during the summer preceding registration in year 4, but may not include data or observations obtained as a consequence of participation in field courses such as BIOL 3P71 or 3P72. Submission and oral defence of the thesis is required.
BIOL 4F91
Literature Research and Seminar
Each student will undertake a detailed study of the scientific literature relevant to the topic of the honours thesis.
Restriction: open to BCHM and BIOL (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours), a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the Chair.
Note: to be taken in conjunction with BIOL 4F90. Review will be included in the thesis and will be presented as a seminar.
BIOL 4F92
Library Research Essays
Each student will be required to carry out two detailed studies of the scientific literature under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to BCHM, BIOL (single or combined) and BTEC majors with approval to year 4 (honours), a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the Co-ordinator.
Note: results of the studies will be presented in major essays and formal seminars. One research topic is to be completed each term.
#BIOL 4P03
Current Topics in Photobiology
(also offered as BCHM 4P03)
The interaction of light with biological molecules. Effects of ultraviolet radiation, photosynthesis, vision and photoregulation of genes and proteins.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one-half BCHM credit numbered 3(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
BIOL 4P05
Concepts of Biodiversity in a Biosphere Reserve
Issues of ecosystem survey and long-term monitoring of changes due to human activities and environmental factors (natural and anthropogenic). Examination of natural versus urban ecosystems based on integrative studies from the biological, geological, geographical, management, social and economic perspectives.
Lectures, fieldwork.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2Q04.
Note: intensive two week course with a major field work component. BIOL 3P96 or MATH/STAT 1P98 recommended. Registrants must see course instructor for permission and application form. Field trip fees. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*BIOL 4P06
Bioinformatics
(also offered as BCHM 4P06 and BTEC 4P06)
Sequence analysis, phylogeny, databases and tools, functional genomics, genome projects, basic bioinformatics programming.
Lectures, seminar, computer lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50, 3P51 or permission of the instructor.
Note: BIOL 2P05, BCHM 3P02 and MATH/STAT 1P98 are recommended.
#BIOL 4P08
Topics in Plant and Microbial Biotechnology
(also offered as BCHM 4P08 and BTEC 4P08)
Characterization of biochemical processes and structures. Genetic modification of such processes and structures through molecular manipulation to meet scientific and/or societal needs. Examples include yeast and microbial enzymes or enzyme systems as well as crop proteins and enzymes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 2P94, 3P50, BCHM 3P01, 3P02, CHEM 3P93 or permission of the instructor.
BIOL 4P10
Microbial Pathogenesis
A molecular approach to microbial diseases in a variety of hosts focusing on human diseases. Topics include animal models for diseases, molecular diagnostics, identifying virulence factors and population genetics of pathogenic microbes.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P98.
*BIOL 4P11
Theory of Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
(also offered as BCHM 4P11 and BTEC 4P11)
Theory behind basic and some advanced techniques in nucleic acid and protein manipulations and analysis.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overalls credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50.
BIOL 4P13
Bioenergetics
Exploration of the molecular basis of cellular energy transduction. Topics may include biogenesis of mitochondria, assembly and function of respiratory complexes, mitochondrial signaling and apoptosis, and methodological approaches to studying cellular energetics.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P30 or BCHM 3P01.
#BIOL 4P18
Paleobotany and Palynology
(also offered as ERSC 4P18)
Fossil record of the green lineage: chlorophytes, charophytes and embryophytes. Evolution of the clade Viridiplantae. Record of terrestrialization and of plant interactions with fungi and animals. Reconstruction of paleoenvironments and paleoclimates from paleobotanical evidence.
Lectures, lab, field trips, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P93 or ERSC 2P03.
Note: BIOL 3P03 recommended.
*BIOL 4P20
Synthetic Biology
(also offered as BTEC 4P20)
Technological and engineering advances in the biological sciences, along with tools and discoveries stemming from them. Induced pluripotent stem cells, CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing, optogenetic control of cellular communication, engineering the immune response, programmable DNA-based materials and engineered biosensors.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BCHM 3P01, BIOL 3P50, 3P51.
*BIOL 4P25
Concepts in Bioremediation and Biocommodities
(also offered as BTEC 4P25)
Waste-management technologies that utilize biological agents (such as micro-organisms and plants) to treat hazardous contaminants and produce biocommodities. Biological, biogeochemical and engineering concepts in the design of technologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 15.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): only open to students holding 15 or more credits.
Note: BCHM 3P01 and GEOG 3P14 recommended.
#BIOL 4P26
Stream Form and Function
(also offered as ERSC 4P26 and GEOG 4P26)
Exploration of the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of stream systems.
Lectures, field work, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 2P05, 2Q04, (ERSC 2P09), GEOG 3P09 (2P09) or permission of the instructor.
BIOL 4P28
Developmental Neurobiology
Principles of neural development. Topics include cell lineage and early determinative events, trophic functions, growth and plasticity, synaptogenesis and gene expression in the establishment of the nervous system.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P28 or 3P34.
#BIOL 4P30
Grape Pest Management
(also offered as OEVI 4P30)
Biology and dynamics of grapevine pest activity - insects, diseases, weeds, nematodes, vertebrates. Integrated pest management approach looking at all aspects of control chemical, biological, cultural. Application techniques, pest identification and monitoring.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BCHM, BTEC, OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): OEVI 2P99.
Note: field trip fee required.
BIOL 4P34
Neural Networks and Behaviour
Integrative mechanisms in the nervous system and the neural basis of behaviour in vertebrates and invertebrates. Topics may include the visual system, rhythm generators and motor function, learning and memory.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P34.
BIOL 4P35
Biology of Sensory Systems
Analysis of the anatomy, physiology, molecular and cellular mechanisms of sensory biology incorporating a neuroethological approach to behavioural processes in animals.  Emphasis on the comparative biology of olfaction, gustation, vision, mechanosensation, thermal sensation, nociception, and chemosensation and magnetoception.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P34; one of BIOL 2P92, BIOL 3P95
Note: BIOL 3P60 recommended
*BIOL 4P41
Human Molecular Genetics
(also offered as BCHM 4P41, BTEC 4P41 and HLSC 4P41)
Principles of human genetics, human genome organization, pedigree, disease gene mapping, forensic and cancer genetics, genome sequencing, personal genomics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50 or 3P51.
*BIOL 4P42
RNA World
(also offered as BTEC 4P42)
Examination of various aspects of RNA (ribonucleic acid) function and evolution. Examination of evidence that RNA preceded DNA as the hereditary material and played a crucial role in the early evolution of life on Earth.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), Bsc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50 or BCHM 3P02.
BIOL 4P43
Biology of Aging
Exploration of current theories of animal aging. Investigation of molecular and cellular mechanisms of aging and determinants of longevity. Examination of age-associated human disorders
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P30.
*BIOL 4P51
Molecular Virology
(also offered as BTEC 4P51)
Bacterial and animal viruses. Topics include biochemical properties, virus-host interaction, productive cycle, effect of virus on host cell and organism, viral vectors and gene therapy, recombinant viral vaccines and origin of virus.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50 or permission of the instructor.
BIOL 4P53
Immunology
Humoral and cellular immunity; structure and synthesis of immunoglobulins; origin of antibody diversity; transplantation immunity and the importance of the major histocompatibility complex; auto-immunity and allergic reactions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50 or BCHM 3P01.
BIOL 4P56
Genes and Behaviour
Genetic, developmental and environmental influences on the behaviour of invertebrates and vertebrates. Single versus locus effects and the inheritance of quantitative behavioural traits. Analyses of gene expression and genetic pathways influencing behaviour in model animals.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P51 or 3P97; BIOL 3P60.
*BIOL 4P57
Bacterial Genetics
(also offered as BTEC 4P57)
Molecular and transmission genetics of bacteria. Bacterial genetics from early descriptions of transformation and transduction to current developments in molecular genetics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P98 and 3P50 or permission of the instructor.
*BIOL 4P58
Fungal Genetics
(also offered as BTEC 4P58)
Transmission and molecular genetics of fungi. Recent advances in gene manipulation and the contribution of studies on these organisms to general genetic principles.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 2P96, 3P50, 3P51 or permission of the instructor.
BIOL 4P64
Insect Behaviour
Selected topics in the field of insect behaviour including: programming and integration of behaviour orientation and dispersal, feeding and plant-herbivore co-evolution, chemical, visual and acoustical communication, defensive behaviour, reproductive behaviour and the eusocial insects.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 2P05, 3P60, 3P64 or permission of the instructor.
#BIOL 4P80
Dendrochronology
(also offered as ERSC 4P80 and GEOG 4P80)
Fundamental principles of tree-ring analysis and applications to address contemporary issues in the fields of climate and environmental change, geomorphology, archaeology and ecology.
Lectures, local field trip, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 2Q04, (ERSC 2P09), GEOG 3P09 (2P09) or permission of the instructor.
Note: Biological Sciences majors must take BIOL 2Q04; BIOL 2P93 or 2P94 is strongly recommended.
BIOL 4P84
Physiology of Excitable Cells
Neurons, muscle and/or neurosecretory cells at the cellular and subcellular levels. Topics include ion channel activity, patch clamp recording, intracellular messenger systems, mechanisms of neurosecretion and neural plasticity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P34 or permission of the instructor.
#BIOL 4P85
Ecosystems and Changing Disturbance Regimes
(also offered as ERSC 4P85 and GEOG 4P85)
Terrestrial ecosystem response to large-scale environmental change. Topics may include disturbance regimes, adaptation, alteration of biogeochemical cycles, invasive species and range shifts, carbon cycle feedbacks, predicting future climate and vegetation impacts, change detection, scaling-up and nonlinearity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
Administrative Assistant
Leslie Wenzl
905-688-5550, extension 3388
Mackenzie Chown MC F234
brocku.ca/biology
The biological sciences, or the life sciences, encompass a broad spectrum of subjects from molecular biology to ecology as well as such disciplines as biochemistry, biophysics, genetics and physiology. The program is designed to provide the student with a broad base in modern biological thought, to fulfill the basic requirements for admission to professional and advanced degree studies and to prepare graduates for careers in the biological sciences and related fields. Although the undergraduate program provides students with flexibility in selecting the areas of biology most compatible with their interests and skills, it also ensures that students develop an overview of the major concepts and problems of modern biology as expressed at all levels of biological organization.
The objectives of the undergraduate program are realized through a group of core courses in years 1 and 2, each with an associated laboratory. Laboratory classes stress the investigative approach to experimental studies. Students move progressively from structured laboratory studies to increasingly independent investigations and in the honours year undertake individual research projects. Working from the core program, students may follow a variety of curriculum patterns to satisfy their interests.
Students must consult faculty advisers when planning years 3 and 4 of the BSc (Honours) and BSc with Major programs or year 3 of the BSc (Pass) program.
The honours year provides students with the opportunity for either broadening their understanding of the biological sciences or for increased specialization. Ideally, the honours program provides an opportunity for the synthesis of material presented in earlier years. Students must apply to the Department of Biological Sciences in order to be admitted to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite requirements are strictly enforced in Biological Sciences courses. Students lacking prerequisites will be automatically deregistered from courses. Students are encouraged to plan their courses two years ahead in order to ensure that appropriate prerequisites are obtained.
Students should be aware that numerous year 3 and 4 courses are offered in alternating years. Consult brocku.ca/mathematics-science/departments-and-centres/biology for details on yearly course offerings.

5

Biomedical Sciences
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
BMED 4F90
Honours Thesis
Students undertake a limited research project involving laboratory study under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to BMED majors with approval to year 4 (honours), a minimum 80 percent major average and permission of the Co-ordinator.
Corequisite(s): BMED 4F91.
Note: to be taken in conjunction with BMED 4F91. Submission and oral defense of the thesis is required.
BMED 4F91
Literature Research and Seminar
Students undertake a detailed study of the scientific literature relevant to the topic of the honours thesis.
Restriction: open to BMED majors with approval to year 4 (honours), a minimum 80 percent major average and permission of the Co-ordinator.
Corequisite(s): BMED 4F90.
Note: to be taken in conjunction with BMED 4F90. The literature review will be included in the thesis and will be presented as a seminar.
BMED 4F92
Library Research Essays
Students will be required to carry out two detailed studies of the scientific literature under faculty and teaching assistant supervision. 
Restriction: open to BMED majors with approval to year 4 (honours), a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the instructor.
Note: results of the studies will be presented in major essays and formal seminars. One research topic is to be completed each term.
Administrative Assistants
Leslie Wenzl
905-688-5550, extension 3388
Mackenzie Chown F234
brocku.ca/biology
Mary Montgomery
905-688-5550, extension 4228
Academic South 329
brocku.ca/hlsc
The main focus of the Biomedical Sciences program is on the molecular basis of human health. It draws on the expertise of faculty in Health Sciences in the medical aspects of human health and of faculty in Biological Sciences in the theory, methods, and applications of molecular biology. This program will prepare students for careers in biomedical research, teaching or professional programs in health sciences.

6

Biophysics
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
BPHY 4F90
Research Project I
Experimental or theoretical research project, emphasizing Biophysics, to be carried out under the supervision of a faculty member from the departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry or Physics.
Note: the project may, under special circumstances, be started in the summer months. Students must consult the Program Adviser regarding their proposed program during the first week of lectures.
BPHY 4F91
Research Project II
Detailed experimental or theoretical research project, emphasizing Biophysics, to be carried out under the supervision of a faculty member from the departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry or Physics.
Prerequisite(s): BPHY 4F90.
Note: the project may, under special circumstances, be started in the summer months. Students must consult with the Program Adviser regarding their proposed program during the first week of lectures. BPHY 4F90 and BPHY 4F91 may be taken concurrently.
Administrative Assistant
Elizabeth Horvath
905-688-5550, extension 3412
Mackenzie Chown B210
physics@brocku.ca
Biophysics is the physics of life, of all living systems and their interaction with the surroundings, natural and artificial. It is a relatively new, but rapidly advancing field encompassing a wide variety of areas in natural and life sciences and uses all methods of scientific inquiry: theory, experiment and large scale computer simulation to understand living systems at the molecular level. Biophysics also forms the basis of many aspects of Medical Physics, another rapidly developing field in much demand at the current time. Brock's biophysics program will provide the students with a superb learning environment and exciting research opportunities. Extended research opportunities are available through Brock's participation in the Interdepartmental Biophysics Group (BIG) based at the University of Guelph.
The interdisciplinary nature of the Biophysics program offers an opportunity to modify the sequence of courses to be taken, to reflect better the interests of the individual students. However, this places a greater onus on the students to make sure that the prerequisites are satisfied, and that a sufficient number of credits at each level is included. Biophysics students are strongly encouraged to contact the Co-ordinator no later than year 2 of their studies, to ensure that their chosen sequence of courses satisfies all academic constraints.
In view of the vastness of the field of Biophysics and the enormous diversity among its various subfields, the program offers a high degree of flexibility to its students at the 4th year level in terms of choice of BIOL, BTEC, CHEM, KINE, PHYS and PSYC/NEUR courses.
Eligibility to continue in the program is based on the student's major average. All courses required for the program, excluding the electives, will be considered for the major average.
Biophysics is an Honours only program. If a student's major average falls below the required 70 percent average by year three, they are advised to seek a three-year BSc Degree in General Studies. Students should note that such a degree requires a minimum of five credits in one subject.

7

Biotechnology
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
BIOTECHNOLOGY COURSES
BTEC 2P09
Introduction to Biotechnology
Traditional and modern biotechnology. Topics include fermentation processes, medical, agricultural and forensic applications; as well as gene cloning and expression.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91, 1P92 (1F90), CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
Note: materials fee required.
#BTEC 2P63
Introduction to Biophysical Chemistry
(also offered as CHEM 2P63)
Physical chemistry as applied to biological sciences. Introductory thermodynamics, kinetics, equilibria, and transport phenomena as applied to proteins, biological membranes and other biological systems. Laboratory work includes kinetic measurements, equilibrium constant measurements and protein purification and characterization.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BPHY, CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BTEC, BCHM, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92); one of MATH 1P01 and 1P02, MATH 1P05 and 1P06 (preferred), or MATH 1P97.
Note: materials fee required.
BTEC 3P09
Bioreactor Processes
Fermentation technology and bioprocessing; the kinetics and thermodynamics of fermentation. Topics include batch and continuous fermentation, biomass production (single-cell proteins), immobilized systems, by-product recovery and scale-up.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 2P63.
Note: materials fee required.
#BTEC 3P43
Applied Microbiology
(also offered as BIOL 3P43)
Ecology of micro-organisms and special adaptations that permit their use in biotechnology and applied microbiology.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P98 or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
#BTEC 3P50
Molecular Genetics
(also offered as BIOL 3P50)
Topics include the genetic code and information flow from nucleic acids to proteins, RNA and protein synthesis; prokaryotic and eukaryotic chromosomes; gene organization; transcription, RNA processing; codon usage; enhancer and transposons.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week for 6 weeks.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
#BTEC 3P62
Bio-organic Chemistry
(also offered as CHEM 3P62)
Mechanistic description of the biosynthesis and metabolism of natural products including alkaloids, terpenes and acetate-derived compounds. Selected examples of biologically/medicinally active classes of natural products along with their physiological modes of activity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21.
#BTEC 3P93
Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry
(also offered as CHEM 3P93)
Chemistry and structure of nucleic acids, proteins and carbohydrates. Selected aspects of chemical synthesis and biosynthesis, including mechanisms of protein folding, post-translational modification, targeting, sequencing, detection techniques and biochemical/medical applications of these molecules.
Lectures, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21.
BTEC 4F90
Research Project
Experimental research carried out under faculty supervision.
Restriction: permission of the Director.
BTEC 4F91
Thesis
Incorporates results of the research project and will form the basis of a seminar presented by the student.
Restriction: open to BTEC majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Corequisite(s): BTEC 4F90.
#BTEC 4P06
Bioinformatics
(also offered as BCHM 4P06 and BIOL 4P06)
Sequence analysis, phylogeny, databases and tools, functional genomics, genome project, basic bioformatics programming.
Lectures, seminar, computer lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 3P50, BIOL 3P51 or permission of the instructor.
Note: BCHM 3P02, BIOL 2P05 and MATH/STAT 1P98 are recommended.
#BTEC 4P08
Topics in Plant and Microbial Biotechnology
(also offered as BCHM 4P08 and BIOL 4P08)
Characterization of biochemical processes and structures. Genetic modification of such processes and structures through molecular manipulation to meet scientific and/or societal needs. Examples include yeast and microbial enzymes or enzyme systems as well as crop proteins and enzymes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specifed in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BTEC 3P50, 3P93, BCHM 3P01, 3P02, BIOL 2P94 or permission of the instructor.
#BTEC 4P11
Theory of Techniques in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
(also offered as BCHM 4P11 and BIOL 4P11)
Theory behind basic and some advanced techniques in nucleic acid and protein manipulations and analysis.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overalls credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 3P50.
#BTEC 4P20
Synthetic Biology
(also offered as BIOL 4P20)
Technological and engineering advances in the biological sciences, along with tools and discoveries stemming from them. Induced pluripotent stem cells, CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing, optogenetic control of cellular communication, engineering the immune response, programmable DNA-based materials and engineered biosensors.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BTEC 3P50, BCHM 3P01, BIOL 3P51.
#BTEC 4P25
Concepts in Bioremediation and Biocommodities
(also offered as BIOL 4P25)
Waste-management technologies that utilize biological agents (such as micro-organisms and plants) to treat hazardous contaminants and produce biocommodities. Biological, biogeochemical and engineering concepts in the design of technologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/ BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BCHM, BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): open to students holding 15 or more credits.
Note: BCHM 3P01 and GEOG 3P14 recommended.
#BTEC 4P26
Toxicological Chemistry and Biochemistry
(also offered as CHEM 4P26)
Principles of toxicology. Key enzymes involved in the metabolism and biotransformation of xenobiotics. Actions of xenbiotics on nucleic acids, proteins and lipids. Biochemical mechanisms of the toxicity of selected xenobiotics such as toxins, common toxic chemicals, drugs and pesticides. Identification of xenobiotics in biological systems.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
#BTEC 4P27
Enzyme and Co-enzyme Mechanisms
(also offered as CHEM 4P27)
Hydrolytic and other processes catalyzed by enzymes lacking non-protein prosthetic groups; transferase reactions involving biotin, pyridoxal phosphate, thiamine pyrophosphate, folic acid and cobalamin; oxidation mechanisms involving pyridine nucleotides, flavoenzymes, hydroperoxidases and oxygenases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): BCHM 3P01, 3P02 and CHEM 2P21.
#BTEC 4P28
Bio-organic Chemistry: Carbohydrates and Nucleic Acids
(also offered as CHEM 4P28)
Topics include mono and oligosaccharides, preparative carbohydrate chemistry, neoglycoconjugates, immunochemistry of carbohydrates, nucleosides and nucleotides, oligonucleotide synthesis, medicinal chemistry of oligonucleotides, amino acids, protein structures, peptide chemistry and post-translational modifications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21.
#BTEC 4P41
Human Molecular Genetics
(also offered as BCHM 4P41, BIOL 4P41 and HLSC 4P41)
Principles of human genetics, human genome organization, pedigree, disease gene mapping, forensic and cancer genetics, genome sequencing, personal genomics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 3P50 or BIOL 3P51.
#BTEC 4P42
RNA World
(also offered as BIOL 4P42)
Examination of various aspects of RNA (ribonucleic acid) function and evolution. Examination of evidence that RNA precedes DNA as the hereditary material and played a crucial role in the early evolution of life on Earth.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BMED, BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 3P50 or BCHM 3P02.
#BTEC 4P51
Molecular Virology
(also offered as BIOL 4P51)
Bacterial and animal viruses. Topics include biochemical properties, virus-host interaction, productive cycle, effect of virus on host cell and organism, viral vectors and gene therapy, recombinant viral vaccines and origin of virus.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specifed in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 3P50 or permission of the instructor.
#BTEC 4P57
Bacterial Genetics
(also offered as BIOL 4P57)
Molecular and transmission genetics of bacteria. Bacterial genetics from early descriptions of transformation and transduction to current developments in molecular genetics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specifed in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 3P50 and BIOL 2P98 or permission of the instructor.
#BTEC 4P58
Fungal Genetics
(also offered as BIOL 4P58)
Transmission and molecular genetics of fungi. Recent advances in gene manipulation and the contribution of studies on these organisms to general genetic principles.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BTEC, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BMED, NEUR, OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specifed in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of BTEC 3P50, BIOL 2P96, 3P51 or permission of the instructor.
#BTEC 4P67
Biophysical Techniques
(also offered as BCHM 4P67 and CHEM 4P67)
Modern instrumental methods of biotechnology emphasizing understanding theory. Development of newer technologies which utilize biological components. Topics include optical, X-ray and NMR techniques, separation techniques, hybridization assays, immunoassays, biosensors and mass spectral techniques; membrane chemistry.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): BTEC 2P63 and CHEM 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
CO-OP COURSES
BTEC 0N01
Work Placement I
First Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
BTEC 0N02
Work Placement II
Second Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
BTEC 0N03
Work Placement III
Third Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
BTEC 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
BTEC 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
BTEC 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BTEC 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BTEC 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BTEC 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BTEC 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BTEC 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BTEC 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BTEC 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
BTEC 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BTEC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): BTEC 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistant
Jennifer Roberts
905-688-5550, extension 3406
CRN 411
brocku.ca/biotechnology
Biotechnology is the use of living organisms to produce goods and services for practical and industrial purposes. Biotechnology has been used for centuries in fermentation and the making of bread and cheese, but today involves new scientific tools like genetic and protein engineering, cell fusion and production of monoclonal antibodies. Biotechnology is a strategic technology and an important economic component of industrialized nations. Biotechnology at Brock is a joint effort of the Departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry, with courses drawn from both departments plus courses designed specifically for the program.
The Biotechnology Co-op program combines academic and work terms over a period of five academic years. Students spend two years in an academic setting studying the fundamentals of Biotechnology prior to their first work placement. Successful completion of courses in the core areas of Biotechnology provides the necessary academic background for the work experience. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, Biotechnology Co-op students are assessed an administrative fee for each work term (see the Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue in the Biotechnology Co-op program is based on the student's major and non-major averages. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average may continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Biotechnology Co-op program, but may continue in the non-co-op Biotechnology stream. If a student subsequently raises his/her major average to 70 percent, the student may be readmitted only if approved by the Co-op Admissions Committee. For further information, see the Co-op Programs section of the Calendar, and contact the Centre for Biotechnology.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Programs Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Program Office.
The Biotechnology Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have honours standing and who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience.

8

Business
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ACCOUNTING COURSES
ACTG 1P01
Introduction to Financial Accounting
Fundamental concepts of financial accounting as related to the balance sheet, income statement and statement of cash flows. Understanding the accounting cycle and routine transactions. Integrates both theoretical and practical application of accounting concepts.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 1P11, 1P91 and 2P51.
ACTG 1P02
Introduction to Managerial Accounting
Accounting for managerial decision-making, including identifying relevant data, understanding various cost accounting systems and breakeven analysis. Integrates both theoretical and practical application of accounting concepts.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P01 (1P11).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 1P12, 2P12 and 2P51.
ACTG 1P91
Introduction to Financial Accounting
Fundamental concepts of financial accounting as related to the balance sheet, income statement and statement of cash flow. Problems of income determination, asset and equity measurements and analysis of financial statements.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 1P01, 1P11 and 2P51.
ACTG 2P12
Introduction to Management Accounting
Accounting for managerial decision-making, including identifying relevant data, understanding various cost accounting systems and breakeven analysis.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P01 or 1P91.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grades and credits obtained in ACTG 1P02, 1P12 and 2P51.
ACTG 2P21
Cost and Managerial Accounting I
Internal recording systems developed to implement and guide management planning and control emphasizing cost identification, product costing, cost behaviour and cost allocations as well as analysis and communication of relevant information to users in a professional manner.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors and BBA students approved to the Accounting concentration. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P02 (1P12) or 2P12.
ACTG 2P31
Accounting for External Reporting I
Topics in theory preparation and analysis of external financial reports under Canadian GAAP. Topics may include the Canadian financial reporting environment, the conceptual framework underlying financial reporting, accounting information systems, revenue recognition, reporting financial performance, financial position and cash flows, and accounting for cash, temporary investments and receivables.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors and BBA students approved to the Accounting concentration or permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P02 (1P12) or 2P12.
ACTG 2P32
Accounting for External Reporting II
Advanced topics in the preparation of external financial reports according to current GAAP. Use, critique and analysis of financial reports. Topics may include accounting for inventory; property, plant and equipment; intangibles; short and long term liabilities; and owners' equity.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors and BBA students approved to the Accounting concentration or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors and BBA Co-op students approved to the Accounting concentration until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 2P31.
ACTG 2P40
Commercial Law
Basic legal considerations for the business organization.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors. In Spring Session open to BBA Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 1P71.
ACTG 2P51
Understanding Accounting
Role of accounting in society. Basic concepts underlying financial and managerial accounting and information systems used by accounting.
Restriction: not open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 1P01, 1P11, 1P12, 1P91 and 2P12.
ACTG 3P11
Auditing Concepts
Nature and importance of the audit function, the role, professional and legal responsibilities of the auditor, and the audit report. Audit planning, materiality, risk and audit evidence.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors and BBA students approved to the Accounting concentration or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors and BBA Co-op students approved to the Accounting concentration until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 3P97.
ACTG 3P23
Cost and Managerial Accounting II
Continuation of the study of internal recording systems emphasizing performance evaluation, divisional performance measurement, transfer pricing, behavioural implications of accounting information and current issues including analysis and communication of relevant information to users in a professional manner.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to BAcc non Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 2P21.
ACTG 3P33
Accounting for External Reporting III
Advanced topics in the preparation of external financial reports according to current GAAP. Use, critique and analysis of these reports. Topics may include accounting for long-term investments, leases, income taxes, pensions, error analysis, cash flow statements and ethics.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to BAcc non Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 2P32.
ACTG 3P41
Taxation I
Principles underlying federal income taxation in Canada through an analysis of the Income Tax Act, R.S.C., as amended. Computation of net income for tax purposes.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P02 (1P12) or 2P12.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 4P40.
ACTG 3P97
Accounting Information Systems
Fundamental concepts of accounting information systems emphasizing analysis, design and implementation of information systems and internal controls.
Lab, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors and BBA students approved to the Accounting concentration or permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P02 (1P12) or 2P12; ITIS 1P97.
#ACTG 4P03
Financial Analysis
(also offered as FNCE 4P03)
Importance and use of financial statement information in areas such as analysis of credit, equity investment, industry and competitors, analysis of mergers and acquisitions and the firm's strategy in communicating information to capital markets.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc students, BBA students approved to the Finance concentration, General Management concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93.
ACTG 4P11
Accounting Theory
Economic, behavioural and ethical foundations of accounting theory including the need for and development of standards, a conceptual framework, alternatives to present accounting models and current issues.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Fall Term, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 3P33.
ACTG 4P12
Integration and Problem Solving
Incorporates sub disciplines of accounting in the context of a wider view of organizations through the examination of applied and theoretical issues.
Cases, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Fall Term, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 3P23, 3P33, 4P41 and 4P61.
ACTG 4P34
Accounting for External Reporting IV
Advanced topics in theory, preparation and analysis of external financial reports under Canadian GAAP. Topics may include theory and practice of consolidation procedures, accounting for international operations and financial instruments, and basics of accounting for not-for-profit organizations.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to BAcc non Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 3P33.
ACTG 4P40
Tax Strategies for Planning and Decision Making
Principles of individual and corporate taxation emphasizing the effects of federal and sub federal income taxes on decision making in business.
Lectures, discussion, cases, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Accounting concentration, BBE Financial Economics option students and combined Business majors until the date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BBA, BBE Financial Economics option students, combined Business majors and to students who hold a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average. Students must hold a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P02 (1P12) or 2P12.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 3P41, 4P41 and 4P42.
ACTG 4P41
Taxation II
Computation of taxable income and taxes payable for individuals and corporations. Rights and obligations of the taxpayer. Determination of the effects of federal income taxes on decision-making, partnerships and trusts.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to BAcc non Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 3P41.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 4P40.
ACTG 4P42
Taxation III
Topics include tax implications of changes in corporate structures, corporate distributions, rollovers and shareholder manager remuneration.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to BAcc non Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 4P41.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ACTG 4P40.
ACTG 4P61
External Auditing I
Review and assessment of internal controls, planning and execution of the audit, evaluation of audit evidence and use of sampling techniques
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to BAcc non Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 3P11.
ACTG 4P62
External Auditing II
Emphasis on the completion of the audit, evaluation of results, audit reports, review engagements and current topics.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc majors or permission of the Department. In Fall Term, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 4P61.
ACTG 4P91
Research Topic
Directed intensive study or research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
ACTG 4V90-4V99
Topics in Accounting
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors.
ENTREPRENEURIAL STUDIES COURSES
ENTR 2P51
Entrepreneurship Basics
Entrepreneurs and the new venture creation process: attributes of entrepreneurs and the processes involved in successfully launching new enterprises.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA, STAC, TMGT, TOUR majors, Business and Management minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must hold a minimum 3.0 overall credits. Not open to BBA and BAcc majors.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENTR 2P91.
ENTR 2P91
Entrepreneurship
Theories of entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship, entrepreneurial attributes, new venture creation processes and feasibility plan preparation.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA, BAcc and combined Business majors. In Winter Term open to BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 2P31, or MGMT 1P93 and 1P96.
Note: may be offered as on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENTR 2P51.
ENTR 3P92
Creativity and the Entrepreneur
Exploration of creative and personal entrepreneurial abilities. Topics include sources of ideas and their transformation into commercial opportunities, environmental scanning, trend identification and futurism.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ENTR 2P51 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 3P93
Managing Growth in Entrepreneurial Firms
Development of management concepts and techniques relevant to new and growing enterprises. Adaptations of management techniques due to limitations of management time and resources in early stage companies and changes to management approaches as companies grow.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ENTR 2P51 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 3P94
Corporate Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Management of innovation and entrepreneurship in midsized and larger organizations. The role of leadership in developing and maintaining innovation and entrepreneurship and the mechanisms for stimulating organizational growth and entrepreneurial culture. How organizations respond to innovation.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ENTR 2P51 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 3P96
Venture Capital and the Entrepreneur
Financial challenges and strategies for new and growing ventures; evaluating and packaging new venture opportunities; importance of business angel and venture capital finance.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ENTR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 3P98
Family Business
Theories, research and current practices relating to family business management. Topics include the importance of family businesses, the role of the founder and the entrepreneur, intergenerational succession, going outside the family, managing conflict, strategic management of the family business.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc and BBA majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#ENTR 3P99
Research Methods in Organization Studies
(also offered as OBHR 3P99)
Techniques and methods of conducting reliable and valid research including theory and hypothesis testing, measurement, survey and experimental design, and other quantitative and qualitative research methods. Emphasis on understanding and critical evaluation of empirical research in organizational behaviour, human resource management, entrepreneurship and other fields in organization studies.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Entrepreneurship concentration and Human Resource Management concentration until the date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 3V90-3V99
Topics in Entrepreneurship I
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 4F90
Research Topic
Directed intensive study and research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 4P10
Planning New Venture Creation
Identification and assessment of appropriate forms for commercial development of new ventures. Strategic and operational planning relevant to the creation of an entrepreneurial firm. Preparation of a formal business plan.
Lectures, case discussion, presentations, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ENTR 2P51 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 4P91
Research Topic
Directed study or research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 4P93
International Dimensions of Entrepreneurship
Strategies to recognize global opportunities and to use global networks for resources, design and distribution of goods and services for customers in other parts of the world.
Lectures, case discussion, presentations, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ENTR 2P51 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENTR 4V90-4V99
Topics in Entrepreneurship II
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ETHICS COURSES
ETHC 2P51
Business, Society, and Ethics
Topics may include, internal and external stakeholder analysis; corporate governance and strategic management; business ethics and leadership.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Note: Cannot be taken with ETHC 3P82.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ETHC 3P82.
ETHC 3P82
Business Ethics
Ethical issues pertaining to business behaviour, business organizations and economic systems. Topics may include ethical issues involving the social purpose of business, rights and responsibilities of shareholders and stakeholders, the environment, corporate governance, international issues, and ethical issues involving accounting, marketing, finance, operations, employees, customers, suppliers and the general public.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, combined Business majors and Business minors with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits. In Spring Session open to BBA Co-op and BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
FINANCE COURSES
FNCE 2P50
Introduction to Personal Financial Planning
Financial goal setting, evaluating the financial implications of goals, preparation and analysis of personal financial statements, understanding personal credit and debt; emphasis on mortgage borrowing, investment alternatives for individuals and families, personal taxes, basic insurance products desired for family protection, financial planning in retirement and estate planning.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Note: may be offered online.
FNCE 2P51
Introduction to Finance
Criteria used in making investment decisions, risk concepts and the valuation of assets, a financial analysis, forecasting and leverage, the theory of interest, valuation and capital budgeting.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FNCE 2P91.
FNCE 2P91
Corporate Finance I
Finance function in the private and public sectors. Techniques of financial analysis. Investment in current assets, capital budgeting, valuation, risk and return, and cost of capital.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors. In Fall Term open to BAcc, BAcc Co-op, BBA Co-op, EBS Double Degree and BBE Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P01 (1P11) or 1P91; ECON 1P91 and 1P92; one of MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97; MATH 1P98.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FNCE 2P51.
FNCE 3P93
Corporate Finance II
Capital structure and dividend policy. Analysis of long and short term financing decisions. Introduction to options and futures, mergers and acquisitions.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors. In Spring Session open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Winter Term open to BAcc, BAcc Co-op, BBA Co-op, EBS Double Degree and BBE Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 2P91.
FNCE 3P95
Personal Financial Planning
Tools and techniques of developing comprehensive personal financial plans. Topics include financial analysis of client goals, assessing wealth and the capacity to accomplish goals, debt management strategies, personal portfolio management, tax management strategies, risk management and insurance, financial strategies in retirement, and estate planning emphasizing wills, trusts and estate freezing.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93.
FNCE 3P96
Financial Theory
Theoretical foundations of finance and their implications for the financial decision making of both individuals and corporations. Decisions involving the valuation of fixed assets and marketable securities under conditions of certainty and uncertainty and in the context of perfect and imperfect capital markets.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration, General Management concentration, International Business concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93 (minimum 60 percent); ECON 2P90 or 2P91.
FNCE 4P02
Corporate Financial Policy
Case discussions to develop and apply understanding of material in FNCE 2P91 and 3P93 to situations encountered in business decision settings.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P96.
*FNCE 4P03
Financial Analysis
(also offered as ACTG 4P03)
Importance and use of financial statement information in areas such as analysis of credit, equity investment, industry and competitors, analysis of mergers and acquisitions and the firm's strategy in communicating information to capital markets.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration, General Management concentration, BAcc and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93.
FNCE 4P04
Investment Analysis and Portfolio Management
Examination of the investment/asset allocation decision for the individual and institutional investors. Discussion of the main asset pricing models and market efficiency tests. Theoretical and practical valuation models of common stocks, preferred stocks, mutual funds and pension funds. Use of different instruments in various investment strategies such as investment, speculation, hedging and arbitrage. Techniques used by analysts to pick investments such as fundamental analysis, technical analysis and quantitative analysis.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P96.
FNCE 4P05
International Finance
Overview of the international financial environment, the theoretical and practical aspects of the various international financial markets and the impact of the international environment on the financial decision making of the individual and the firm.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration, General Management concentration, International Business concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93 or 3P96.
FNCE 4P08
Management of Financial Institutions
Organizational structure and operating practices; self-regulation, government and international regulation of financial institutions; managerial aspects associated with savings, credit liquidity, assets, liabilities and capital problems, financial planning, strategy formulation and performance evaluation. Growth of financial services on a global basis.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P96.
FNCE 4P09
Portfolio Management
Utility theory and stochastic dominance, the efficient formation of portfolios in mean/variance framework under various assumptions, application of asset pricing models to portfolio management, the evaluation of portfolio performance and current topics in portfolio management. Students will employ computer software in the management of stock and fixed income portfolios.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA and BBA Co-op students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P96 and 4P04.
FNCE 4P15
Advanced Topics in Financial Theory
Theoretical concepts are extended to include capital structure, dividend policy, leasing and mergers. May include computer applications of theory to empirical data.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE , BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P96.
FNCE 4P16
Derivatives I
Introduction to options and futures markets. Pricing principles and theory of these derivative securities as they apply to various trading and hedging strategies.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P96.
FNCE 4P17
Derivatives II
Further refinements in the theory of derivative securities and its application to options and futures markets.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 4P16.
FNCE 4P18
Fixed Income Securities
Analysis of the bond markets concentrating on fixed income and fixed income derivatives markets. Risks and returns associated with investments in the markets and on how these instruments can be optimally allocated to yield successful portfolio performance.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration and BBE Financial Economics option students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P96.
FNCE 4P19
Fintech with Blockchain and Cryptocurrencies
Topics include cryptocurrencies, blockchains, smart contracts and their implications in the FinTech area to the financial world. Implications to cryptofinance cover investment products, derivatives, portfolio management and initial coin offerings.
Lectures, article discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Finance concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93.
Note: may be offered online.
FNCE 4P91
Research Topic
Directed intensive study or research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty.
Note: to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
FNCE 4V90-4V99
Topics in Finance
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE and combined Business majors.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INFORMATION SYSTEMS COURSES
ITIS 1P97
Data Analysis and Business Modelling
Process of transforming input data into useful information for effective business decision making. The use of data and information to better understand the customers and the markets. Hands-on experience with computer software tools in data analysis, model development and solution analysis.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors. In Fall Term open to BAcc majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Winter Term open to BBA, BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
ITIS 2P51
Introduction to Information Systems
Information systems and technology and its interactions with functional areas. Topics include information systems concepts, data management, the internet and applications, organizational information systems, and cultural, legal, security and ethical issues in the information age.
Lectures, case discussions, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to BAcc, BBA, BCB, and combined Business majors.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ITIS 2P91.
ITIS 2P91
Management of Information Systems and Technology
Value and uses of information systems for business operation and management decision making for strategic advantage. Applications to business including intranet, extranet and e-commerce. Analysis, design, implementation and maintenance of information systems and the management challenges of information technology.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA majors until the date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BBA and BAcc majors. In Fall Term open to BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 1P97.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ITIS 2P51.
ITIS 3P91
Quantitative Methods for Information Systems
Multivariate data analysis and quantitative methods in information systems and their application to business decision making. SPSS and/or other relevant statistical software to generate solution output. Topics include data preparation, data testing and transformation, multiple regression, principal components analysis, common factor analysis, multiple discriminant analysis, multiple and logistic regression and multivariate analysis of variance. Introduction to structural equation modelling, hierarchical linear modelling, canonical correlation or multidimensional scaling.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 or ACTG 3P97; MATH 1P97 and 1P98.
ITIS 3P92
Information Assurance
Concepts, terminologies, models and practices related to confidentiality, integrity and availability of information. Security investigation and analysis, technical, legal, socio-political, and managerial issues related to information security and privacy, security threats, risk management, identification and prioritization of information assets, information security strategy and architecture, continuity planning, physical security, personnel security, and technologies and techniques in information security.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 or ACTG 3P97.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ITIS 4P27.
ITIS 3P98
Fundamentals of Database Design and Management
Role of databases in organizations. Business requirement analysis and use of tools and techniques for designing and administering a new database. Conceptual data modelling and emphasis on the relational database model. Application of concepts using current commercial systems. Database manipulation using SQL and other query mechanisms. Transaction management, maintenance, reliability and security. Database trends and emerging technologies.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 or ACTG 3P97.
ITIS 4F90
Research Topic
Directed intensive study and research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
ITIS 4P21
Introduction to Business Analytics
Foundations, functionalities and applications of data mining. Data mining languages and systems, data characterization, generalization and comparison, classification and prediction, association rule mining, and clustering.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 or ACTG 3P97.
ITIS 4P22
e-Business Applications
Architecture of e-commerce applications and communications infrastructure supporting e-business. Managing e-business practices and strategic deployment of e-business for global competitive advantage.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 or ACTG 3P97.
ITIS 4P25
Systems Analysis and Design
System development life cycle and design strategies. Feasibility study, process modelling and data modelling. System prototyping, implementation, operation and maintenance and security. User involvement and training. Measurement and evaluation of system performance and emerging trends.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 or ACTG 3P97.
#ITIS 4P26
Supply Chain Management
(also offered as OPER 4P26)
Supply chain modelling and performance. Managing material, information and financial flows. Enabling roles of the Internet, technology and information. Design of supply chain networks, applications of ERP, e-commerce and e-procurement technologies and decision support systems in managing supply chains. Business process outsourcing and strategic partnerships.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 or ACTG 3P97; ECON 2P91 and OPER 2P91.
ITIS 4P91
Research Topic
Directed study or research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area of demonstrated student competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE, BCB and combined business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
ITIS 4V90-4V99
Topics in Information Systems
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE and combined Business majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
MANAGEMENT COURSES
MGMT 1P93
Principles of Business
Issues relating to managing businesses in Canada. The definition and interaction of the core functional areas of business, the legal environment and ethical issues.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA, BCB, BCMN, STAC, SPMA, combined Business majors and Management minors. In Fall Term open to BBA, BBA Co-op, EBS Double Degree, BCB and combined Business majors until date specified in the Registration Guide.
Note: BAcc students with less than 10.0 credits may register. Contact Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MGMT 1P51 and 1P52.
MGMT 1P96
Principles of Communication in the Business Environment
Skill-based introduction to business problem solving. Structured case study analysis in major functional areas of business to develop critical reasoning teamwork, professionalism, report writing and business presentation skills.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA, BCB and combined Business majors until the date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBA Co-op, EBS Double Degree, BCB and combined Business majors. In Fall Term, open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors with a minimum of 2.0 overall credits.
MGMT 3P98
International Business
Global business environment; development, implementation and evaluation of international business strategies; international opportunities and constraints facing Canadian businesses.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc and BBA majors with a minimum of 8.5 overall credits. In Fall Term open to BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 2P31, or MGMT 1P93 and 1P96.
MGMT 3P99
Business Case Analysis and Action
Business case analysis in major functional areas of business, with recommended implementable and defensible strategies. Focus on producing and communicating deliverables that reflect those commonly used in business today.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors with a minimum of 10.00 overall credits.
MGMT 3V90-3V99
Topics in Management I
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
MGMT 4F90
Research Topic
Directed intensive study and research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
MGMT 4P35
Export Strategy and Management
Techniques required to do business overseas. Concepts, processes and theories associated with the development and management of export markets. Investigation, analysis and reporting on various export marketing management issues.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc and BBA students.
Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3P98.
MGMT 4P36
Business in Developing Countries
Political, business/economics, legal and social/cultural institutions in developing countries. Designed to recognize and contend with the unique developing country environment.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3P98.
MGMT 4P90
Business Strategy
Industry analysis and competitive strategy emphasizing integration of functional area strategies and positioning with regard to market opportunities.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined majors with a minimum of 14.00 overall credits. In Spring Session open to BAcc non Co-op, BBA non Co-op and combined Business majors until the date specified in Registration guide. After that open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 15.5 overall credits. In Fall Term, open to BAcc Co-op, BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93, MKTG 2P91, OPER 2P91 and OBHR 2P91.
MGMT 4P91
Research Topic
Directed study or research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty.
Note: to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
MGMT 4P94
Transnational Business Management
Multinational firms' operation in a global economy. Motivations and mentalities of internationalization; creation of layers of competitive advantage over multinational markets; alliance and knowledge management.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MGMT 3P98.
MGMT 4P96
Business and Society
Global forces that shape the context in which business takes place. Theoretical perspectives for linking business and its political, social and natural environment; potential sources of strategic and competitive advantage resulting from good corporate citizenship, problems associated with poor corporate citizenship.
lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93, MKTG 2P91, OPER 2P91 and OBHR 2P91.
MGMT 4P97
Advanced Topics in Business and Society
Topics may include neoclassical economics and the social role of business, environmentalism and the greening of business, social issues relating to downsizing, automation and the future of work, corporate philanthropy, employment equity and pay equity, the relation of business and government.
Seminar, case discussion, student presentations, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ETHC 3P82.
MGMT 4P99
Management Consulting
Theoretical perspectives and approaches, conditions for successful intervention, establishing and managing the client relationship, triggering and managing change, politics and group processes, effective communication and ethics.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): FNCE 3P93, MKTG 2P91, OBHR 2P91 and OPER 2P91.
Note: enrolment limited to 40 students per section.
MGMT 4V90-4V99
Topics in Management II
A course structured by a faculty member having specialized interest in an area within the discipline.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
MARKETING COURSES
MKTG 2P51
Marketing Basics
Introduction to basics of marketing.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, BBE, CREC, CREN, STAC, TMGT majors, Business and Management minors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to BAcc, BBA, SPMA and combined Business majors.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MKTG 2P91, RECL 3P40 and SPMA 2P65 (3P65).
MKTG 2P52
General Marketing Management
Exploring the marketing management process.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, BBE, STAC and TMGT majors, and Management minors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to BAcc, BBA, SPMA and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P51.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MKTG 3P24, MKTG (OEVI) 4P92, RECL 3P40 and SPMA 2P65 (3P65).
MKTG 2P91
Introduction to Marketing
Characteristics of the marketing function in Canada, basic marketing concepts and the marketing function in organizations.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. In Fall Term open to BAcc, BAcc Co-op, BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 2.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 2P31 or MGMT 1P93.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MKTG 2P51.
MKTG 3P24
Marketing Management
Marketing concepts in decision-making and the role of the marketing manager.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. In Winter Term open to BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): MGMT 1P93, 1P96 and MKTG 2P91.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MKTG 2P52.
MKTG 3P96
Marketing Research
Market research as a managerial tool including scientific method, research and questionnaire design, experimentation, sample selection, data collection and research procedure.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration, General Management concentration and BBE majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
Note: a fieldwork assignment will be required.
MKTG 3P97
Marketing of High-Technology Products and Innovations
Topics include the characteristics, types and patterns of innovation and their marketing implications, tools used to gather marketing intelligence, use of strategic alliances, and understanding of regulatory and ethical considerations.
Lectures, discussions, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52, 3P24 or permission of the instructor.
MKTG 3P98
Marketing Analytics and Intelligence
Essential decision models and strategic metrics forming the cornerstone of marketing analytics, allowing for the maximization of the return on marketing investment. Conceptual discussions and applied/hands-on analyses. Topics include market sizing, forecasting, positioning, promotion budget allocation, profit maximization and communicating through marketing data-driven presentations.
Lectures, class discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4F90
Research Topic
Directed intensive study and research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
MKTG 4P23
Marketing Communications
Management problems in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of programs in the areas of advertising, selling and promotional activities.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P25
Marketing Strategy
Topics include analysis of industry, customer, market and competitive environments, sources of competitive advantage and methods of allocating resources to new and established products. The strategic role of market evolution and cost dynamics.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration and BBE majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P26
Professional Selling and Sales Management
Consultative sales process and management of the sales force and the role of the sales function in marketing strategy. Topics include developing, implementing, evaluating strategic sales programs and developing personal competency as a professional salesperson.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P28
Retail Management
Managerial role and its effect on retailing decisions. Institutional structure of retailing and its past and probable future patterns. Marketing strategies and interrelationships among suppliers, customers and members of the distribution channels.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE , BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P29
Business to Business Marketing
Application of marketing principles to business products and services to other companies, government bodies and institutions. Unique aspects of business marketing including the shifting of power in buyer-seller relationships, shortness of distribution channels emphasizing personal selling. Types of business customers and increasingly important role of B2B commerce in the business marketplace.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P31
Consumer Behaviour
Application of behavioural science concepts to marketing; the interactions of consumers, sellers, public policy makers and researchers.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration and BBE majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P33
International Marketing
Marketing concept and individual components of the marketing mix in the context of the international environment; the differences between international and domestic marketing and how they affect the planning, organization and control of marketing programs.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration and International Business concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 3P24 and MGMT 3P98.
MKTG 4P34
Marketing Financial Services
Application of marketing principles to financial services.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration and International Business concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC and combined business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
Note: site visits to Canadian and US financial institutions.
MKTG 4P36
Marketing Channel Management
Channels from the manufacturer to end-users including structure and design, selecting channel members and managing channel relationships for superior performance.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration and General Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P37
Augmented Reality Marketing
Application of Augmented Reality (AR) to marketing through reviewing theories, strategies and tactics. Strategic opportunities for, and practical knowledge, to implement AR marketing campaigns.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52, 3P24 or permission of the instructor.
MKTG 4P91
Research Topic
Directed study or research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
#MKTG 4P92
Wine Marketing
(also offered as OEVI 4P92)
Understanding the wine consumer, segmentation, positioning, marketing mix, marketing research, marketing strategy, domestic and international wine marketing issues.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MKTG 2P52 and SPMA 2P65 (3P65).
MKTG 4P93
Internet and Social Media Marketing
Theoretical understanding of the dynamism of the internet marketplace. Practical knowledge needed to perform vital digital marketing functions such as an online presence and utilization of the internet and social media.
Lectures, class discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P94
New Product Development
Examination of process through which new products are designed, developed and commercialized. Integration of different functions including design, marketing, packaging and finance in the development of a successful new product.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P95
Services Marketing
Nature and characteristics of services, their marketing and service quality.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 2P52 or 3P24.
MKTG 4P98
Pricing
Price strategies and interaction of price with other marketing mix variables. Normative management practice and underlying conceptual theories and models involved in pricing decisions. Topics include customer-driven pricing, relevant costs, price sensitivity, managing competitive information, negotiated prices, segmented pricing, pricing psychology, ethics and price law.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Marketing concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): MKTG 3P24.
MKTG 4V90-4V99
Topics in Marketing
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE and combined Business majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT COURSES
OPER 2P51
General Operations Management
Operations management and its interactions with other functional areas. Topics include process analysis, forecasting, scheduling, materials management, quality assurance and capacity planning.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to BAcc, BBA, BCB or combined Business majors.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OPER 2P91.
OPER 2P91
Operations Management
Improving efficiency and quality in organizations. Service and product design, process design, managing technology, capacity planning, facility location and design, resource planning, inventory management, scheduling, improving productivity, managing quality and various tools for decision-making.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. In the Fall Term open to BAcc and BAcc Co-op majors. In the Winter Term open to BBA, BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 1P01 (1P11) or 1P91; ITIS 1P97; MATH 1P98.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OPER 2P51.
OPER 3P91
Advanced Operations Management
Skills and intuition development for approaching various operational challenges. Tools for more advanced analysis and software for improving efficiency and quality.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OPER 2P91.
OPER 3P92
Project Management
Concepts and techniques for managing projects. Role of the project manager, strategic issues, resource allocation, conflict management, planning, budgeting, risk management, scheduling and controlling projects.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OPER 2P91.
Note: materials fee may be required.
OPER 3P93
Quality Management
Effectively managing quality, combining theory and practice to formulate models for quality improvement and control. Statistical tools, techniques for process re-engineering and improvement, and designing quality into products and services.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OPER 2P91 and MATH 1P98.
OPER 3P94
Games of Strategy
Decision modeling in competitive and co-operative situations. Equilibriums, information, signaling and screening, principals and agents, commitment, and playing the larger game. Applications from corporate acquisitions, bargaining and arbitration, outsourcing, ethics, pricing and promotion, auctions, organizational politics, and financial reporting and analysis.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OPER 2P91 and MATH 1P98.
Students will not receive earned credit in OPER 3P94 if OPER 3P91 or MATH (ECON) 3P73 have been successfully completed.
OPER 4F90
Research Topic
Directed intensive study and research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
*OPER 4P26
Supply Chain Management
(also offered as ITIS 4P26)
Supply chain modelling and performance. Managing material, information and financial flows. Enabling roles of the Internet, technology and information. Design of supply chain networks, applications of ERP, e-commerce and e-procurement technologies and decision support systems in managing supply chains. Business process outsourcing and strategic partnerships.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OPER 2P91 and ECON 2P91; ACTG 3P97 or ITIS 2P91.
OPER 4P31
Simulation of Business Systems
Science and art of business modelling, using computer software with animation. Models for operations, information systems, finance, marketing and other types of systems. Technical aspects of simulation blended with the practical realities of working with real data in real situations. Implementation of the entire simulation modelling process, including data collection, model development, analysis of outputs and how to improve on existing system configurations and/or decision rules.
Lectures, case discussion, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OPER 2P91 and MATH 1P98.
OPER 4P41
Management Science
Emphasis on modelling business issues. Topics include network optimization, integer, nonlinear and goal programming, queuing models and computer simulation.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P91 and OPER 2P91.
OPER 4P91
Research Topic
Directed study or research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area of demonstrated student competence.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE, BCB and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member.
OPER 4V90-4V99
Topics in Operations Management
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BBE and combined Business majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOUR AND HUMAN RELATIONS COURSES
OBHR 2P51
Basics of Organizational Behaviour and Design
Micro and macro aspects of formal organizations from a behavioural perspective. Theories, research and current practices in the management of human resources and the design of organizations. Topics include motivation, leadership, group dynamics, organizational goals and effectiveness, environment and other contingencies and organizational culture.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBE, BCMN, CREC, CREN, STAC, TMGT majors, Business and Management minors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to BAcc, BBA, SPMA and combined Business majors.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OBHR 2P91, 3P42, SPMA 2P05, 2P21 and 3P21.
OBHR 2P52
Basics of Human Resources Management and Industrial Relations
Importance of legislation and its relationship to rights and to various systems associated with both human resource management and employee's industrial relations in the workplace.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBE, BCMN, STAC, TMGT majors and Management minors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to BAcc, BBA, BCB, SPMA and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P51 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered online.
Students will not receive earned credit for OBHR 2P52 if OBHR 3P96 or 3P97 have been successfully completed. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 3P05 (2P05) and 2P21.
OBHR 2P91
Organizational Behaviour
Micro aspects of formal organizations from a behavioural science perspective. Theories, research and current practices in the management of human resources. Topics may include motivation, leadership, group dynamics, interpersonal communication, conflict, stress management and organizational theory and design.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. In Fall Term, open to BAcc, BAcc Co-op, BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Spring Session, open to BAcc Co-op majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG 2P31, or MGMT 1P93 and 1P96.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OBHR 2P51.
OBHR 3P42
Organizational Structure and Redesign
Building blocks of organizational architecture and current practices in organizational design and redesign. Topics may include the development of management thought, organizational effectiveness and efficiency, design challenges, alternative approaches to structural design, organizational development and change, power and politics in organizations, and organizational culture.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration and General Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OBHR 2P51.
OBHR 3P96
Labour Relations
Labour management relations in Canada emphasizing the collective bargaining process, the grievance and arbitration process and other aspects of collective agreement administration.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 3P97
Human Resource Management
Recruitment, selection and training, wage and salary administration and the design and administration of benefit programs.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. In the Winter Term open to BBA Co-op and EBS Double Degree majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 3P98
Occupational Health and Safety
Legal, technical and management issues regarding employee health and safety.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until the date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P52 or 2P91.
*OBHR 3P99
Research Methods in Organization Studies
(also offered as ENTR 3P99)
Techniques and methods of conducting reliable and valid research including theory and hypothesis testing, measurement, survey and experimental design, and quantitative and qualitative research methods. Emphasis on understanding and critical evaluation of empirical research in organizational behaviour, human resource management, entrepreneurship and other fields in organization studies.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration and Entrepreneurship concentration until the date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4F90
Research Topic
Directed intensive study and research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA and combined Business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P65
Negotiating in Organizations
Causes and consequences of conflict in organizations, and strategies and tactics to manage conflict. Emphasis on the use of bargaining and negotiation skills to manage conflict and resolve disputes.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 3P42 or 3P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P66
Compensation Management
Compensation theory and practice, design and administration of compensation and reward systems. Pay and benefits determination; job and market evaluation; use of individual, group and organizational incentives.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 3P97 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P67
Training and Development
Three sequential steps in the training and development process in organizations: assessment of training needs, development and implementation of the training program and evaluation of the training program. Training methods used in employee orientation, skill training and management development in the context of adult education.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 3P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P68
Leadership
Theoretical and practical aspects of leadership to familiarize students with personal leadership capacities.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB, BBE, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P52 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P69
Recruitment and Selection
Personnel selection, placement and performance evaluation in organizations in the context of human rights/equal employment legislation. Recruitment and selection strategies and the validation of selection, placement and performance evaluation practices.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 3P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P72
Labour Law
Federal and provincial labour statutes, the practices of federal and provincial labour relations boards and ministries of labour and the common law of employer employee relations. The impact of these statutes, regulations, boards and ministries on management, unions and employees.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB, BCMN, BBE, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of OBHR 2P52, 3P42, 3P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P90
International Organizational Behaviour
Understanding behaviour in global organizations. Topics may include cultural differences, managing decision-making and personnel transitions, international negotiations and organization design for global competition.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration and International Business concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of OBHR 2P52, 3P42, 3P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P91
Research Topic
Directed study and research under the supervision of a faculty member in an area in which the student has shown particular competence.
Restriction: open to BBA and combined business majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Chair and supervising Faculty member.
Note: topic to be chosen in consultation with the supervising faculty member. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P93
Leading Change
Theories, research and practice in the area of organizational change emphasizing the organization as a whole and the interdependency of its elements.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BBE, BCB, BCMN, STAC, TMGT and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of OBHR 2P52, 3P42, 3P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P94
Human Resources Planning
Human resource strategies and their support of organizational strategies. Identification of business strategies, determination of appropriate human resource strategies, assessment of current human resource assets and planning future human resource requirements of the firm.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until the date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 3P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P95
Managing a Diverse Workplace
Diversity theories; opportunities and dilemmas managers face when working with diverse populations.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): OBHR 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4P96
Labour Arbitration
Issues faced by employees, union representatives, supervisors and managers in the day-to-day administration of collective agreements. Types of disputes include discipline and discharge, seniority related disputes, compensation, management rights and the reasons why some complaints cannot be decided by arbitrators.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc. BBA, LABR (single or combined) and combined Business majors. Students must have a minimum of I0.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of OBHR 3P96, LABR 2P00, 2P03.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4V90-4V99
Topics in Organizational Behaviour and Human Resources
Courses in specialized areas within the discipline.
Restriction: open to BBA, BBE and combined Business majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
OBHR 4V98
2020-2021: HR Analytics
Evidence-based approach to HRM. Introduction to theory, concepts, and business application of human resources research, data, metrics, systems, analyses and reporting.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA students approved to the Human Resource Management concentration until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BAcc, BBA, BCB and combined Business majors.
Prerequisite(s): ITIS 2P91 and OBHR 3P97.
PROFESSIONAL MASTERS PREPARATION BUSINESS COURSES
PMPB 6F20
Preparing for Business Graduate Studies in Canada
Introduction to the academic expectations in Canada, focusing on tools to effectively transition to graduate studies. Development of critical thinking and study skills to achieve academic success. Multiple approaches to problem solving through theoretical concepts, case studies, and applied business practice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Professional Masters Preparation Certificate-Business students.
PMPB 6F21
Writing for Business Purposes
Development of writing skills to enhance clarity and expression of ideas. Focus on writing as a process from prewriting through proofreading. Overview of specific writing patterns and models of successful academic writing, including accurate referencing, and avoidance of plagiarism. Steps of planning and producing effective business documents, both print and electronic.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorials 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to Professional Masters Preparation Certificate-Business students.
Note: weekly grammar tutorials will be held.
PMPB 6F22
Listening and Speaking for Business Purposes
Preparation for listening and note-taking in an academic environment. Development of ability and confidence to communicate in academic and professional settings, asking and responding to questions, seeking clarification, leading discussions, and engaging in impromptu conversations. Exploration of the practical skills of public speaking and development of presentation skills.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorials 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to Professional Masters Preparation Certificate-Business students.
Note: weekly pronunciation tutorials will be held.
PMPB 6P12
Business Student Success
Examination of topics in human relations and development of interpersonal skills to increase overall success in business career. Tools to understand and manage self, effectively deal with other people and get ahead in future career. Completion of self-assessments, skills exercises, case studies, critical reflections, and volunteer work to maximize learning and development of soft skills essential for today's workplace.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Professional Masters Preparation Certificate-Business students.
PMPB 6P23
Reading for Business Purposes
Comprehension of university-level reading to understand ideas from academic and business texts, analyzing, synthesizing, and evaluating information from varied sources. Development of critical reading skills and academic and business vocabulary through authentic material and scaffolded practice. Skills to become an independent reader and monitor own reading process.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Professional Masters Preparation Certificate-Business students.
CO-OP COURSES
ACCC 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
ACCC 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op
ACCC 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
ACCC 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
ACCC 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
ACCC 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentations, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
ACCC 2C01
Co-op Reflective earning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented wo experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N90
Corequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and re successful work term performance evaluation.
ACCC 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive successful work term performance evaluation.
ACCC 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive successful work term performance evaluation.
ACCC 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learning in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive successful work term performance evaluation.
ACCC 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BAcc Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ACTG or ACCC 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive successful work term performance evaluation.
ADMI 0N11
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
ADMI 0N12
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
ADMI 0N13
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
ADMI 0N14
Work Placement IV
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
ADMI 0N15
Work Placement V
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
ADMI 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentations, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
ADMI 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academics studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ADMI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ADMI 0N11.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ADMI 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ADMI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ADMI 0N12.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ADMI 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ADMI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ADMI 0N13.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ADMI 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ADMI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ADMI 0N14.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ADMI 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academics studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ADMI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ADMI 0N15.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistants
Department of Accounting
Hania Halwani
905-688-5550, extension 3918
GSB 244
Department of Finance, Operations and Information Systems
Val DeSimone
905-688-5550, extension 4426
GSB 475D
Department of Marketing, International Business and Strategy
Cindy Curtis
905-688-5550, extension 3944
GSB 455
Department of Organizational Behaviour, Human Resource Management, Entrepreneurship and Ethics
TBD, obhree@brocku.ca
905-688-5550, extension 5072
GSB 418
brocku.ca/business
The Goodman School of Business offers 20 credit programs in Accounting and Business Administration. A subsequent degree is available in the Bachelor of Accounting program for students holding an undergraduate degree in another discipline. A four credit Minor in Business is open to Brock students pursuing degrees in other Faculties.
Normally students cannot take courses for which they lack the prerequisites or for which they do not meet course restrictions. Exceptions may be allowed only in extraordinary circumstances and with permission of the instructor. Exceptions that would result in a violation of university regulations and exceptions for students refused admission into the Goodman School of Business or who have been adjudicated out of any Goodman School of Business program will also require Dean's approval. Students should submit override requests on-line at portal.bus.brocku.ca

9

Business Economics

10

Canadian Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
 tst
CANADIAN STUDIES COURSES
CANA 1F91
Introduction to Canadian Studies
Examination of the creation of Canadian identity, boundaries, and institutions, through historical, political, and cultural mythologies. Application of the interdisciplinary tools of Canadian Studies to texts, film, music, literature, popular media and artistic interpretations in Canada.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
CANA 1F92
Intercultural Communication in a Multicultural Canada
Examination of the importance of competent (inter) cultural communication in Canada's increasingly multicultural society. Topics include theories of intercultural communication and adaptation, as well as understanding some of the roots of cultural difference in Canada. Topics will be addressed from multiple perspectives, including sociological and psychological research, business modelling, and journalistic and creative narratives by many of Canada's current writers on culture and diversity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: seminars offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 1F90 or 1P80.
#CANA 2F60
Foundations for Community Engagement
(also offered as CRIM 2F60 and SOCI 2F60)
Interdisciplinary examination of philosophies, social histories and politics of community service, combined with experiential learning and field trips in community settings, and practices of self-reflection on community engagement.
Lectures, seminar, experiential learning activities, 3 hours per week.
Note: transportation and additional cost is the student's responsibility.
#CANA 2F62
Contact in Canadian Literature
(also offered as ENGL 2F62)
Contact between Indigenous peoples and Settler populations in Canadian Literature.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of instructor.
Note: offered online.
#CANA 2F80
Introduction to Indigenous Education in Canada
(also offered as INDG 2F80)
Overview of First Nation, Metis and Inuit education in Canada. Examination of various Indigenous traditions, philosophies and culturally-based models from both historical and contemporary Indigenous perspectives.  Indigenous perspectives on the current state and future direction of learning and research.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F80.
#CANA 2P01
Colonial Canada
(also offered as HIST 2P01)
Canadian history from the pre-contact period to 1867.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#CANA 2P02
Post-Confederation Canada
(also offered as HIST 2P02)
Canadian history from 1867 to the present.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#CANA 2P21
Canadian Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 2P21, FILM 2P21 and PCUL 2P21)
Survey of the media in Canada. Studies in the popular arts, referencing the ways that institutions (CBC, NFB) and selected artists identify and express a Canadian cultural imagination.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN and PCUL majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CANA, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN, PCUL majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
#CANA 2P64
Early Canadian Literature
(also offered as ENGL 2P64)
Explorations of cultural conflict and the emergence of the nation from first contact to exploration to settlement.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#CANA 2P65
Twentieth-Century Canadian Literature
(also offered as ENGL 2P65)
Canadian literary response to the radical social and cultural shift of modernism. Topics include war, gender, industrialization and urbanization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#CANA 2P66
Cultural Conflict in Canadian Literature
(also offered as ENGL 2P66)
Writing from the post-centennial explosion and maturation of Canadian literature, including current cutting-edge work. Topics may include postmodernism, multiculturalism, ecocriticism and small press experimentation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#CANA 2P86
Women, Gender and the Economy
(also offered as LABR 2P86, SOCI 2P86 and WGST 2P86)
Women in the Canadian labour market. Topics include allocation of time between the household and the labour market, gender segregation in the work place, how earnings are determined, causes of occupational and earning difference by gender, role of investment in education and discrimination, recent developments in the labour market and their impact on women and men, and selected policy issues.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits and a minimum 65 percent overall average.
Note: may be offered online.
CANA 2P91
Culture and Power in Canada I: Cultural Communities
Interdisciplinary examination of Canadian culture and society employing a variety of methods and perspectives. Approaches drawn from cultural studies, social theory and critical analysis applied to examples of Canadian literature, art, cinema and popular culture. Topics may include dynamics of race, class and gender, linguistic diversity, multiculturalism, ethnic relations and cultural appropriation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CANA 1F91 recommended, lecture offered online.
CANA 2P92
Culture and Power in Canada II: Cultural Institutions
Interdisciplinary examination of Canadian culture and society employing a variety of methods and perspectives. Approaches drawn from cultural studies, social theory and critical analysis applied to examples of Canadian literature, art, cinema and popular culture. Topics may include cultural industries and institutions, cultural and media policies, Canada-US relations and examination of Canadian myths.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CANA 1F91 recommended, lecture offered online.
#CANA 2P93
Critical Practice in the Fine and Performing Arts
(also offered as IASC 2P93, MLLC 2P93 and STAC 2P93)
Interdisciplinary approach to key ideas about music, art, dance and drama through critical readings and guided exposure to selected public fine and performing art events. Exploration of issues in aesthetics and criticism using varied theoretical approaches.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92/1F93), IASC 1F01 (1F00), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
Note: event attendance is required, events fee required.  May be offered online or blended.
#CANA 2P94
Embodied Text: Art Beyond the Artifact
(also offered as IASC 2P94, MLLC 2P94 and STAC 2P94)
Functions of art and artifacts outside the conventions associated with words, texts, paintings and scores. Experiencing musical, visual, movement, and theatre vocabularies through exploration of spatial/temporal/aesthetic/embodied forms of art in performance.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93), IASC 1F01 (1F00), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
#CANA 2P96
Indigenous Theatre
(also offered as DART 2P96 and INDG 2P96)
Theatrical, dramatic and performative representation of Indigenous peoples in the Canadian experience.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93) or permission of the Department.
Note: materials fee and field trip fee may be required. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2P96.
#CANA 2P98
Italians in Canada and Italy-Canada Relations
(also offered as ITAL 2P98)
History of Italian immigration in Canada focusing on Ontario. Italian-Canadian literature including such writers as Nino Ricci and Mary Di Michele. Cultural and economic relations between Italy and Canada including World War II internment experience. Italian contribution to the arts in Canada (art, music, film, literature).
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P98 and ITAL 2P85.
#CANA 2Q90
Canada: War and Nationalism
(also offered as HIST 2Q90)
Relation between war, ethnicity, and national identity in Canada in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#CANA 2Q91
Indigenous Ways of Knowing
(also offered as EDUC 2Q91 and PHIL 2Q91)
Exploration of philosophical and practical applications of Indigenous epistemologies and ontologies in the context of education and civilization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 2Q90.
#CANA 2Q97
Native-Newcomer Relations in Canada
(also offered as HIST 2Q97)
Relationship between Aboriginal people and the newcomers to their lands from the contact era, to military alliance and trade, treaty-making and reserves, emphasizing the roots of current debates and disputes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
CANA 3M90-3M99
Selected Interdisciplinary Studies
Application of principles of interdisciplinary studies and techniques to the study of Canada.
#CANA 3P14
Indigenous Politics in Canada
(also offered as POLI 3P14)
Key historic and contemporary issues in Indigenous politics. Topics include settler-site relations, treaties, reconciliation, Indigenous governance, participation and resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2F12 is strongly recommended.
CANA 3P15
A Foreign Prospect: Canada from Beyond its Borders
Perceptions of Canada and Canadians: originating outside of the nation's borders, topics include Aboriginal relations, government, the environment, warfare, the arts and cultural conflict. From first contact to the contemporary period, drawing upon fictional, historical, political and artistic interpretations of the nation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CANA 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
#CANA 3P16
Politics in Qubec
(also offered as POLI 3P16)
Qubec's political, social and economic evolution since 1945. Topics may include old and new varieties of nationalism, the Quiet Revolution, the changing roles of church and state, the decline of the anglophone minority, Qubec's impact on Canadian Federalism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 2P91, 2P92 (2F91), one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#CANA 3P18
Law and Politics
(also offered as POLI 3P18)
Canadian constitutional law emphasizing the protection of civil liberties both before and after the adoption of the Charter of Rights. Courts in both legal and political perspectives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2F12 strongly recommended.
#CANA 3P28
Canadian Foreign Policy
(also offered as POLI 3P28)
Canadian foreign policy formulation, policy objectives and outcomes in a globalized context. Topics include the Canada-United States relationship, Canada's regional relations, and approaches to global cooperation across a range of global security, social and economic issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*CANA 3P40
The New Niagara
(also offered as GEOG 3P40)
Quantitative and qualitative techniques for examining Niagara's cultural, demographic and economic changes. Topics may include changes in Niagara's industries and occupations, Niagara's position in the world economy, regional growth coalitions, economic restructuring, income inequality, free trade, deindustrialization, agricultural decline, tourism, structural unemployment, demographic transition, in- and out-migration, brain drain, greying population, and transition to cognitive cultural economy.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CANA 1F91, GEOG 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: labs involve using GIS and other software to map and analyze cultural, demographic and economic change in Niagara.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3P93 and GEOG (TREN/TMGT) 3P98.
#CANA 3P61
Using the Canadian Census
(also offered as GEOG 3P61)
Historical and contemporary structure and its related surveys, surveys carried out by Statistics Canada such as the Labour Force Survey or Community Health Survey and applications in digital mapping and demographic analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3V61.
#CANA 3P91
History of Music in Canada
(also offered as MUSI 3P91)
Canadian music and its place in our culture from the earliest European influences to the works of modern Canadian composers,through analysis of selected compositions and an exploration of Canadian music-related industries.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P55 or permission of instructor.
Note: basic fluency in musical notation is required.
#CANA 3P93
Indigenous People in Media and Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P93, PCUL 3P93 and SOCI 3P93)
Historical and contemporary representations of Indigenous people in mainstream media and popular culture. Indigenous interventions in production of cultural content and media structures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Restriction: open to BCMN, CANA, COMM, MCMN, PCUL, SOCI (single or combined) majors and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CANA 1F91, COMM 1F90, SOCI 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
#CANA 3P98
French Colonial Canada
(also offered as HIST 3P98)
"French Canada" and Indigenous peoples in the context of Atlantic World in the era of settler colonialism, 1604-1763.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CANA/HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours), BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
CANA 3V90-3V99
Advanced Topics in Canadian/American Transnationalism
Studies in specialized transnational topics in Canadian Studies.
Lectures, seminars, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CANA 2P91 and 2P92 (2F91) or permission of the instructor.
CANA 3V93
2020-2021: Transnational Migration to North America
Interdisciplinary study of transnational migration to Canada and the United States in the twentieth century. Topics may include comparisons of immigration policies, migration motives, and analyses of settlement experiences.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CANA 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
#CANA 4F00
Voices from the Past: Oral History
(also offered as HIST 4F00)
Use and interpretation of oral history as a source for historical research.  Engagement with oral history methods and best practices including: ethics; community engagement and shared authority; memory, life-story and digital story-telling; interviewing; recording, archiving and digitization; copyright.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date, open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
CANA 4F99
Honours Thesis/Project
Independent interdisciplinary study under the guidance of a faculty adviser.
Restriction: open to CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Director.
Note: students are responsible for making arrangements with a supervising faculty member and must submit a written proposal by September 15. Thesis/project, to be evaluated by a faculty committee representing the disciplinary areas to which the thesis/project is related.
CANA 4P00
Directed Reading
Directed individual or group reading and written work in an area of Canadian Studies.
Restriction: open to CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Program Director.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a supervising faculty member and must submit a written proposal, signed by the supervisor, to the Director for approval before registration.
#CANA 4P10
History in the Field: Ontario and the War of 1812
(also offered as HIST 4P10)
Social, cultural, political and economic impact of the War of 1812 in southern Ontario, emphasizing commemoration and public history. Examinations of historic sites, battle fields and material artifacts will supplement study of historical and historiographical texts; field research at local museums, archives and historic sites.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 2P01 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are responsible for travel and other expenses.
#CANA 4P11
State and Society in Colonial Canada
(also offered as HIST 4P11)
Major cultural and political themes in Canadian colonial history from the British conquest of Acadia to the Confederation of the colonies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
CANA 4P15
Foreign Ventures: Canada's Changing Global Role
Canadian perception of and interaction with other countries and cultures, including state-driven political, military and economic programs, global social and cultural exchanges, and domestic attitudes toward Canada's global role from the late 19th century to the present.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CANA 1F91 or permission of instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CANA 3P95.
#CANA 4P68
Art, Heritage and Culture: Public Policy and Planning
(also offered as DART 4P68, STAC 4P68 and VISA 4P68)
Examination of federal, provincial and municipal protocols governing heritage, fine and performing arts and Canadian cultural production. Strategies for effective engagement of policy through governance and community relations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, CANA, DART (single or combined), DART (Honours), BEd (Intermediate/Senior), SPMA, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in registration guide. Student must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Studies in Arts and Culture.
Note: materials fee may be required.  May be offered online or blended.
CANA 4P81
Experiential Learning Placement
Part-time placement related to Canada within the Niagara Region.
Restriction: permission of the Program Director.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their own unpaid internship or work placement (60-hour minimum) in a company, agency or non-profit organization in consultation with the Program Director.
CANA 4V10-4V70
Topics in Canadian History
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING COURSE
#CANA 3F02
Making History in Niagara (also offered as CANA 3F02)
(also offered as HIST 3F02)
Research, design and presentation of a proposal for a public history project, using local archives, including Brock Special Collections. Projects may include: special exhibits at local museums, historical societies; libraries; historical information plaques; monuments/ memorials; brochures/ pamphlets; digital/on line exhibits; live performances or other artistic productions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Administrative Assistant
Elaine Aldridge-Low
905-688-5550, extension 4029
Glenridge A, Room 213
brocku.ca/canstudies
The Centre for Canadian Studies offers an opportunity to study Canadian culture and society from a variety of disciplinary perspectives, with co-operating faculty from Communication, Popular Culture and Film, Dramatic Arts, Economics, English Language and Literature, Modern Languages, Literatures and Cultures, Geography, History, Political Science, Sociology and Visual Arts.
Students take required interdisciplinary Canadian Studies (CANA) courses along with a number of Canada-centred courses offered by other departments emphasizing the unique nature of the Canadian experience, and the value and practice of combining disciplinary approaches in the study of culture and society. CANA core courses offered in years 1, 2 and 3 are designed to introduce students to interdisciplinary studies in a progressive manner.
The Centre for Canadian Studies offers combined major programs leading to a BA (Honours or Pass) and a Minor for students in other disciplines. Canadian Studies core courses may also be taken as electives by students in other degree programs. Canadian Studies may be combined with any other discipline or program in the Humanities or Social Sciences which offer a combined major program.

11

Chemistry
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
CHEMISTRY COURSES
CHEM 1P00
Introductory Chemistry
Fundamental principles of chemistry. Topics include atomic structure and the periodic table, names and formulas of chemical compounds, principles of chemical bonding, types of chemical reactions, and basic chemical calculations. Tutorials emphasize the development and practice of problem solving skills.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, tutorial and problems solving session, 3 hours per week.
Note: open to students with less than 70 percent 4U/M chemistry or equivalent who are enrolled in a program leading to a BSc degree, or with permission from the Department. CHEM 1P00 is designed to assist those with insufficient background in chemistry to succeed in CHEM 1P91 and 1P92. Students with less than 70 percent in 4U/M chemistry, or who have not taken an advanced high school chemistry course are allowed to take CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 instead of CHEM 1P00 by permission of the Department if they pass a written test of basic chemistry knowledge, to be administered before classes begin. Materials fee required.
CHEM 1P91
Chemical Principles and Properties I
Stoichiometry, inorganic and organic reactions, quantum mechanics, molecular structure and bonding, solutions and their properties, thermochemistry and gas laws.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1.5 hour alternating weeks; plus a minimum of five 3-hour labs per term.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BIOL, BION, BMED, BPHY, BTEC, CAST, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS, HEAR, MSCI, NEUN, NEUR, OEVI, PHYN, PHYS majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BIOL, BION, BMED, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, CAST, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS, HEAR, MSCI, NEUN, NEUR, OEVI, PHYN, PHYS majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): a minimum 70 percent grade in 4U/M chemistry (or equivalent course), CHEM 1P00 or permission of the Department.
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CHEM 1F92 and 1P90.
CHEM 1P92
Chemical Principles and Properties II
Molecular structure, shapes, and behaviour of molecules emphasizing organic compounds, bonding and intermolecular interactions, the states of matter, chemical equilibrium, titrations, entropy, free energy, electrochemistry, and reaction rates.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1.5 hour alternating weeks; plus a minimum of five 3-hour labs per term.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BIOL, BION, BMED, BPHY, BTEC, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS, HEAR, MSCI, NEUN, NEUR, OEVI, PHYN, PHYS majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BIOL, BION, BMED, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, ERSC (single or combined), ERSN, EVGN, EVGS, HEAR, MSCI, NEUN, NEUR, OEVI, PHYN, PHYS majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM (1P90) or 1P91.
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CHEM 1F92.
CHEM 2P12
Introduction to Modern Physical Chemistry
Phase equilibrium; gas phase kinetics; electronic structure of atoms and molecules; interaction of light with matter.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 2 hours per week; plus a minimum of six 3-hour labs.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92); one of MATH 1P01 and 1P02, MATH 1P05 and 1P06 (preferred), MATH 1P97.
Note: CHEM 2P63 recommended.
CHEM 2P20
Principles of Organic Chemistry I
Introduction to the principles and techniques of organic chemistry; correlation of reactions and physical properties of organic compounds with structure and energetic concepts. Introduction to applications of spectroscopy in organic chemistry and biochemistry. Selected experiments in organic preparations and techniques.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial 1.5 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BTEC, NEUN, NEUR, OEVI majors and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHEM (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, NEUN, NEUR, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92) (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
CHEM 2P21
Principles of Organic Chemistry II
Introduction to aromatic molecules and electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. Chemistry of natural products, their origin and biological significance. Topics include concepts of carbonyl and carbohydrate chemistry, DNA and an introduction to amino acids and proteins. Selected experiments in organic synthesis, and characterization and analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial 1.5 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHEM (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P20.
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace a previously assigned grade and credit obtained in CHEM 2P22.
CHEM 2P22
Principles of Organic Chemistry II
Introduction to aromatic molecules and electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions.  Chemistry of natural products, their origin and biological significance. Topics include concepts of carbonyl and carbohydrate chemistry, DNA and an introduction to amino acids and proteins.  Virtual experiments in organic synthesis, and characterization and analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: Open to CHEM (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.  After that date open to CHEM (single or combined), BCHM, BMED, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, NEUR, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P20.
Note: material fees required.
Completion of this course will not replace a previously assigned grade and credit obtained in CHEM 2P21.
CHEM 2P30
Introduction to Molecular Symmetry, Structure and Bonding
Molecular symmetry (symmetry elements, operations and point groups) and basic group theory as applied to qualitative molecular orbital theory and bonding in selected p-block molecules, bonding and reactivity in organic molecules and simple Hckel Molecular Orbital (HMO) theory.
Lectures, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BPHY, BTEC, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BPHY, Bsc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, OEVI majors, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92.
CHEM 2P32
Principles of Inorganic Chemistry
Basic principles of coordination chemistry. Chemistry and reactions in aqueous solutions; structure and bonding in simple compounds. Introduction to bioinorganic chemistry highlighting the overlap between inorganic chemistry and biology. Survey of the periodic table stressing periodicity of chemical behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; plus a minimum of six 3-hour labs.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
Note: materials fee required.
CHEM 2P42
Introduction to Analytical Chemistry
Introduction to analytical methods such as volumetric methods (acid-base, complexometric, precipitation and redox titrations), electroanalytical techniques (potentiometry), spectrophotometry, solvent extraction and chromatography. Statistical treatment of analytical data, chemical equilibria, pH, buffers and chemical activities.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
Note: materials fee required.
*CHEM 2P63
Introduction to Biophysical Chemistry
(also offered as BTEC 2P63)
Physical chemistry as applied to biological sciences. Introductory thermodynamics, kinetics, equilibria, and transport phenomena as applied to proteins, biological membranes and other biological systems. Laboratory work includes kinetic measurements, equilibrium constant measurements and protein purification and characterization.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BPHY, BTEC, OEVI, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHEM (single or combined), CHEN, BCHM, BPHY, BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC, OEVI, Sciences (general) students and CHEM minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92); one of MATH 1P01 and 1P02, MATH 1P05 and 1P06 (preferred), MATH 1P97.
Note: materials fee required.
CHEM 2P98
Undergraduate Research
Undergraduate research project carried out either in the department under the supervision of a faculty member or as an employee in a chemical industry or other suitable laboratory.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined) majors and permission of the Department.
Note: refer to the online guidelines available at brocku.ca/mathematics-science/chemistry/wp-content/uploads/sites/103/2P98-3P98-Course-Requirements-and-Assessment.pdf
CHEM 3P20
Structure and Reactivity of Organic Molecules
Methods for functional group manipulation including oxidation, reduction and the use of protecting groups in organic chemistry. General methods for carbon-carbon bond formation emphasizing three dimensional structure and mechanism. Modern methods of asymmetric synthesis. Selected experiments in synthetic organic chemistry and the handling of air and water sensitive reagents.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21 or permission of the Department.
Note: CHEM 3P40 recommended. May be taken concurrently.
CHEM 3P21
Organic Reactions
The chemistry of amines, heterocyclic and heteroaromatic compounds. Pericyclic reactions and reactive intermediates. Molecular rearrangements, peptide synthesis and protecting groups, design of organic synthesis. Introduction to organic photochemistry and the chemistry of carbenes.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P20.
CHEM 3P30
Main Group Inorganic Chemistry
Systematic inorganic and organometallic chemistry of the main group elements, emphasizing structure, bonding and reactivity in inorganic and organometallic compounds. Selected experiments in inorganic and organometallic synthesis; use of modern structural methods for determination of composition, structure and bonding.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P32.
Note: CHEM 3P40 recommended. May be taken concurrently.
CHEM 3P31
Transition Metal Chemistry
d-Block metal chemistry. Magnetic and electronic properties of metal complexes under different coordination geometries and environments. First row transition metals, their properties, chemical reactivity and applications in materials science, magnetism, optics and nanotechnology. Organometallic compounds of d-block elements and their applications in catalysis.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P30.
Note: CHEM 3P40 recommended. May be taken concurrently.
CHEM 3P40
Spectroscopic Techniques for Structure Elucidation
Use of instrumental methods for the determination of structures of molecules. Techniques will include mass spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, covered Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, visible and UV spectroscopy, computerized data manipulation.
Lectures, tutorial, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P20.
CHEM 3P41
Instrumental Methods for Quantitative Analysis
Modern instrumentation and their applications to quantitative analysis of atomic and molecular species. Separation methods such as gas, liquid and supercritical fluid chromatography, and capillary electrophoresis. Techniques such as UV-vis absorption, atomic absorption, atomic emission, atomic fluorescence and mass spectrometry. Emphasis on sample preparation and cleanup, and quality assurance/quality control.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P42.
Note: materials fee required.
CHEM 3P51
Quantum Chemistry
Schrodinger equation, solution of the harmonic oscillator problem, hydrogen atom, angular momentum theory, variational method with applications to atomic and molecular systems, molecular orbital theory and simple group theory. Introduction to a procedural programming language.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P12.
CHEM 3P53
Atomic and Molecular Structure and Spectroscopy
Group theory and theory of electro-magnetic radiation and spectroscopic transitions. Rotational and vibrational spectroscopy (Microwave, IR, Raman); atomic and molecular electronic spectroscopy (UV/Visible); magnetic resonance (NMR, EPR).
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P51.
CHEM 3P60
Industrial Chemistry
Principles and practice of industrial chemistry. Survey of the chemical industry, pollution control, plant design, corrosion and similar topics. Selected industrial processes will be discussed in detail. Tours of chemical plants and industrial laboratories.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; seminar, plant tour, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two credits from CHEM 2P12, 2P20, 2P21, 2P30, 2P32, 2P42, 2P63.
CHEM 3P61
Organic Chemistry in Industry
Industrial organic chemicals including raw materials, base and commodity chemicals, and chemicals with specialized applications, such as dyes and pigments, fluorophores, agrochemicals, surfactants, and pharmaceuticals.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P20, 2P21 and 2P63.
*CHEM 3P62
Bio-organic Chemistry
(also offered as BTEC 3P62)
Mechanistic description of the biosynthesis and metabolism of natural products including alkaloids, terpenes and acetate-derived compounds. Selected examples of biologically/medicinally active classes of natural products along with their physiological modes of activity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21.
*CHEM 3P93
Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry
(also offered as BTEC 3P93)
Chemistry and structure of nucleic acids, proteins, and carbohydrates. Selected aspects of chemical synthesis and biosynthesis, including mechanisms of protein folding, post-translational modification, targeting, sequencing, detection techniques and biochemical/medical applications of these molecules.
Lectures 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21.
CHEM 3P98
Undergraduate Research Project
Undergraduate research project carried out either in the department under the supervision of a faculty member or as an employee in a chemical industry or other suitable laboratory.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined) majors with 9.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: refer to the online guideline available at brocku.ca/mathematics-science/chemistry/wp-content/uploads/sites/103/2P98-3P98-Course-Requirements-and-Assessment.pdf
CHEM 4F90
Research Project
Experimental or theoretical research to be carried out under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined) and BCHM majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P40 or 3P41.
Corequisite(s): CHEM 4F91.
CHEM 4F91
Thesis
The thesis incorporates the results of the research in CHEM 4F90 and forms the basis for a seminar to be presented by the student.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined) and BCHM majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P40 or 3P41.
Corequisite(s): CHEM 4F90.
CHEM 4P01
Special Topics
Tutorials, seminars, special projects or directed readings in an area of chemistry.
Lectures/seminar/ tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHEM (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Chair.
CHEM 4P17
Biophysical Photochemistry
Principles of light induced processes such as electron, energy and signal transfer and their role in biological systems. Marcus theory, Dexter and Foerster mechanisms of energy transfer. The optical and magnetic resonance spectroscopy of excited states.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P40, 3P53 or permission of the instructor.
CHEM 4P21
Organic Reactions and Synthesis
Organic reaction mechanisms. Named reactions and their use in synthesis. Review of basic physical organic principles. Emphasis on selectivity and stereochemistry in modern synthetic methods including organometallic reactions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P21.
CHEM 4P22
Organic Reactions and Mechanisms
Topics include conformational analysis, introduction to transition state theory and the description of stereo and electronic control in organic reactions. Pertinent applications will be taken from the recent literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P21.
CHEM 4P23
Organometallics in Organic Synthesis
Use of organometallic reagents for organic transformations. Metalation and trans-metalation using organolithium, magnesium, cerium and zinc reagents; stable precursors and reactive intermediates in transition metal catalyzed organic reactions employing palladium, nickel, ruthenium, and other metals. Topics from recent literature involving applications to organic synthesis, emphasizing stereoselectivity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P21 or CHEM 3P20 and 3P31.
#CHEM 4P26
Toxicological Chemistry and Biochemistry
(also offered as BTEC 4P26)
Principles of toxicology. Key enzymes involved in the metabolism and biotransformation of xenobiotics. Actions of xenbiotics on nucleic acids, proteins and lipids. Biochemical mechanisms of the toxicity of selected xenobiotics such as toxins, common toxic chemicals, drugs and pesticides. Identification of xenobiotics in biological systems.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
*CHEM 4P27
Enzyme and Co-enzyme Mechanisms
(also offered as BTEC 4P27)
Hydrolytic and other processes catalyzed by enzymes lacking non-protein prosthetic groups; transferase reactions involving biotin, pyridoxal phosphate, thiamine pyrophosphate, folic acid and cobalamin; oxidation mechanisms involving pyridine nucleotides, flavoenzymes, hydroperoxidases and oxgenases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21, BCHM 3P01and 3P02.
#CHEM 4P28
Bio-organic Chemistry: Carbohydrates and Nucleic Acids
(also offered as BTEC 4P28)
Topics include mono and oligosaccharides, preparative carbohydrate chemistry, neoglycoconjugates, immunochemistry of carbohydrates, nucleosides and nucleotides, oligonucleotide synthesis, medicinal chemistry of oligonucleotides, amino acids, protein structures, peptide chemistry and post-translational modifications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21.
CHEM 4P30
Advanced Co-ordination Chemistry
Bonding and electronic structure of transition metal coordination complexes through an application of symmetry properties and group theory tools. Topics include bonding, electronic structure and properties (ligand field theory), molecular magnetism, EPR properties.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P32 and 3P51.
CHEM 4P31
Advanced Inorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Continuation of CHEM 3P30 and 3P31 focusing on advanced topics of inorganic and organometallic chemistry of main group and transition metal elements, emphasizing the use of modern physical methods for determination of composition, structure and bonding of inorganic and organometallic compounds.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 3P31 and 3P53.
Note: CHEM 3P53 may be taken concurrently with permission of the instructor.
CHEM 4P32
Biological Inorganic Chemistry
Overview of biological inorganic chemistry focusing on the uptake, transport and storage of metal ions, electron-transfer systems, hydrolytic enzymes, oxygen transport/activation, nitrogen metabolism and metallotherapeutics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21 and 2P32.
CHEM 4P34
Structure Determination by X-ray Crystallography
X-ray diffraction by crystalline materials to determine the structures of small molecules. Topics may include crystal growth, selection and mounting, X-ray generation, crystal symmetry and space groups, X-ray diffraction, the phase problem, structure solution and refinement, and interpretation and presentation of structural data.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P32; three CHEM credits numbered 2(alpha)90 or above.
Note: CHEM 4P30 recommended. May be taken concurrently.
CHEM 4P60
Principles of Polymer Chemistry
Polymer synthesis involving condensation, living anionic and cationic polymerization and atom transfer radical polymerization. Cross-linked and dendritic polymers and their properties, and the role played by polymers in biomedical applications such as drug delivery and implantable devices.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P20 and 2P21.
Note: CHEM 3P20 and 3P21 are recommended.
CHEM 4P61
Principles of Silicon Chemistry
Chemistry of silicon in organic, organometallic and polymeric compounds emphasizing structure, bonding and reactivity. Applications of silicon in the biomedical field and the interaction with biomolecules.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P20 and 2P21.
Note: CHEM 2P32, 3P20 and 3P21 are recommended.
*CHEM 4P67
Biophysical Techniques
(also offered as BCHM 4P67 and BTEC 4P67)
Modern instrumental methods of biotechnology emphasizing understanding theory. Development of newer technologies which utilize biological components. Topics include optical, X-ray and NMR techniques, separation techniques, hybridization assays, immunoassays, biosensors and mass spectral techniques; membrane chemistry.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 2P21 and 2P63 or permission of the instructor.
CHEM 4P92
Library Research and Seminar
Detailed study of the scientific literature under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to students in the BSc with Major Chemistry program with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits or permission of the Department.
Note: the results of the study will be written up in a major essay and presented as a formal seminar.
SCIENCE COURSES
SCIE 0N01
Work Experience
Provides students with a work integrated learning experience with an approved employer relevant to the student's degree learning outcomes.
Restriction: Open to students with a minimum of 10.0 credits and who have attained 70% major and 60% non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor (students are required to successfully complete online professional training modules designed and delivered by Co-op, Career and Experiential Education (CCEE) prior to the start of their work experience term).
Note: Full-time work experience employment, 35-40 hours per week for 12 to 16 weeks.
SCIE 1P50
Science and Society I
Basic questions and problems in understanding the nature of science in relation to current environmental issues and their impact on society. Most common scientific concepts and theories associated with major environmental problems facing the world today.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; seminar, 1 hour alternate weeks.
Note: for non-science majors. Co-ordinated through the Department of Chemistry.
SCIE 1P51
Science and Society II
Introduction to interrelationships between science, technology and society. Topics include the nature of science and technology, genetic engineering, pharmaceutical industry and food additives.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; seminar, 1 hour alternate weeks.
Note: for non-science majors. Co-ordinated through the Department of Chemistry.
SCIE 1P52
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Basic chemical knowledge needed to evaluate current controversies involving food, health, drug and energy issues.
Note: offered online. Intended for non-science majors. Co-ordinated through the Department of Chemistry.
CO-OP COURSES
CHEM 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
CHEM 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
CHEM 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
CHEM 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
CHEM 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
CHEM 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): CHEM 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
CHEM 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academics studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): CHEM 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
CHEM 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): CHEM 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
CHEM 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): CHEM 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
CHEM 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academics studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to CHEM Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): CHEM 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
SCIE 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentations, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Science Co-op students.
Note: see Director of Co-op, Career and Experiential Education.
Administrative Assistant
Jennifer Roberts
905-688-5550, extension 3406
CRN 411
brocku.ca/chemistry
Chemistry is the study of matter and its interactions with various forms of energy. Brock students are involved in the analysis, synthesis and purification of substances, determining their structures and properties and explaining the mechanisms of processes.
Our programs stress chemical principles and practice through research in organic, inorganic, analytical, physical and theoretical chemistry, with a strong emphasis on the interdisciplinary fields of bio-inorganic and bio-organic chemistry and chemical biophysics. Research interests of the department include development of new chiral ligands, organometallic reagents, and methods for asymmetric synthesis, green chemistry including bacterial dioxygenase-mediated degradation of aromatics, new approaches in natural product synthesis emphasizing morphine alkaloids, design and synthesis of fluorinated inhalation anesthetic agents and unnatural oligo-saccharide conjugates, ligand design and crystal engineering aimed at self-assembly of novel molecule-based materials, organic electrochemistry, energetics of photosynthesis studied by time-resolved electron spin resonance of short-lived paramagnetic intermediates, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, organometallic mass spectrometry, quantum and computational chemistry, pesticide and trace element analysis, protein affinity labelling and protein-lipid interactions, and structure-activity correlations of anticancer pharmaceuticals.
The Honours program in Chemistry is designed to give the student a broad knowledge of chemistry as well as depth in areas in which the student is most interested. A research project must be successfully completed and a thesis written as part of the requirements for an Honours degree. The Honours program and certain combined Honours programs listed below, when taken with CHEM electives, satisfy the requirements for membership in the Chemical Institute of Canada and are the normal requirements for admission to graduate school in chemistry.
The Chemistry Co-op program combines academic and work terms over a four and one half year period. Students spend two years in an academic setting, where they acquire the necessary background prior to taking the first work placement. Successful completion of courses in the core areas of Chemistry provides the necessary academic background for the work experience. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, Chemistry Co-op students are assessed an annual administrative fee (see the Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue in the Co-op program is based on the student's major average and non-major average. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average will be permitted to continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Chemistry Co-op program, but may continue in the non Co-op Chemistry stream. For further information, see the Co-op Programs section of the Calendar, and contact the Department of Chemistry.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Programs Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Program Office.
The requirement for graduation with a Chemistry (Honours) degree is a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average. The Chemistry Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have honours standing and who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience.
The equipment available in the Mackenzie Chown and Cairns Family Health and Bioscience Research Complexes is actively used for both teaching and research. Undergraduate students gain hands-on experience in operating modern equipment for separating of complex mixtures, determining molecular structures, and making quantitative measurements. Newer equipment is computer-controlled and is connected to the University's Ethernet backbone. Student and faculty researchers have access to cluster platform systems, housed at Brock Univeristy and other SHARCNet academic institutions.
Instrumentation includes 300, 400 and 600 MHz NMR cryospectrometers for high-resolution solution and solids studies. Mass spectrometry facilities include a Thermo DFS high resolution mass spectrometer with EI, CI and FAB ion sources. It is equipped with a high performance capillary GC system. The lab also contains a Bruker HCT Ultra LC/MS system with ESI and APCI interfaces and a BrukerAutoflex II TOF/TOF MALDI system. For X-ray crystallography, a Bruker Apex II CCD diffractometer, equipped with an Oxford low temperature device, is available for the collection of single crystal data. A number of spectroscopic instruments are available in the research laboratories including time-resolved EPR, ICP and ICP/MS, FTIR, UV/Visible, fluorescence cuvette and microplate fluorimeters. There are several chromatography systems for HPLC, FPLC and capillary GC analysis. A state-of-the-art biotechnology research lab was recently equipped for biochemistry and microbiology work. This instrumentation is augmented by a range of modern facilities available through the Cool Climate Oenology and Viticulture Institute, which support work in biochemistry, especially work involving proteins, nucleic acids, yeasts and bacteria.
Students should consult the Department Chair when planning years 3 and 4 of the BSc (Honours) and BSc with Major programs, or year 3 of the BSc (Pass) program.
In addition to its own programs, the Chemistry department participates in combined major programs with five other departments/centres and is also a major participant in the Biochemistry, Biotechnology, and Oenology and Viticulture programs.

12

Child Health

13

Classics
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
CLASSICS COURSES
CLAS 1P91
The Glory of Ancient Greece
Culture and society of ancient Greece explored through literature, art, archaeology and history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
CLAS 1P92
The Grandeur of Ancient Rome
Culture and society of ancient Rome explored through literature, art, archaeology and history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#CLAS 1P93
Culture and Civilization of Central Europe: From the Prehistoric to 350CE
(also offered as GERM 1P93)
Cultural development of Central Europe from the earliest stone and pottery cultures, through the Bronze, Iron and Celtic Ages, ending with the Gallo-Roman period. Beliefs and practices, material objects, artistic developments, and architecture. Digitized images are used to illustrate the cultural evidence.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Note: given in English.
CLAS 1P94
Word Power: Greek and Latin Roots of English
Root words of the English language to build vocabulary and recognize meaning in specialized terminology, focusing on life sciences, medicine and law.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: no previous knowledge of Greek or Latin required.
CLAS 1P95
Myths of the Greek and Roman Gods
Traditional story types: nature myths, ritual myths. Diffusion of myths in the ancient world. The creation, the succession in heaven and the individual gods. Functions of myth in ancient society. Modern theories of myth.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
CLAS 1P97
Myths of the Heroic Age
Traditional story types: folktale, legend. Concept of a Heroic Age, centres and cycles of legend, pseudo-history. Response to Greek and Roman myths through the ages.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
CLAS 2P32
Introduction to Archaeology
History, theory and practice of archaeology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
CLAS 2P34
Cities and Sanctuaries of the Ancient World
Surveys the cities of the ancient Near East, Egypt, and the Greek and Roman worlds from an archaeological perspective, and in their cultural and historical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P34.
*CLAS 2P40
Ancient Sport and Spectacle
(also offered as KINE 2P40)
Sport and sporting values and their central role in ancient society. Topics include sporting events and facilities, sporting festivals, religious and political connections, intellectual and popular attitudes, a comparison of ancient and modern realities and values.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*CLAS 2P50
Great Myths in Literature and Art
(also offered as IASC 2P50)
Most influential myths in Greek and Latin literature and in ancient art, emphasizing continuity of themes and images. Selected readings in major genres of poetry and prose. Selected works of painting and sculpture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
CLAS 2P51
Cleopatra
History, biography, and representation in literature, art and modern media of the most renowned and controversial queen of the ancient world.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
CLAS 2P52
Beyond Troy: The Art, Literature and Film of the Trojan War
Enduring myths of the Trojan War through literature, art, archaeology and film.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*CLAS 2P61
Women in the Ancient World
(also offered as WGST 2P61)
Women's social roles, environment and legal rights including conceptions of the female and ideals of women. Consideration given to women from other parts of the Mediterranean, such as Etruria, Egypt and the Near East focusing on women in Greek and Roman society. Emphasis on the nature and limitations of the various types of evidence.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*CLAS 2P93
History of Early Greece
(also offered as HIST 2P93)
Social and political history of the Greek world from the Bronze Age to 450 BC: Minoans and Mycenaeans, Dark Age, colonizing period, tyrants, rise of Sparta, Persian wars, and Athenian Empire. Readings from Greek historians and documents in translation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 1P91 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST) 3P03.
*CLAS 2P94
History of Classical Greece
(also offered as HIST 2P94)
Social and political history of the Greek world, 450-323 BC. The great war between Athens and Sparta, rivalry of city-states, rise of national states. Alexander the Great. Readings from Greek historians and documents in translation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 2P93 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST) 3P04.
*CLAS 2P97
History of the Early Roman Empire
(also offered as HIST 2P97 and ITAL 2P97)
History of Rome from the Battle of Actium to the death of Marcus Aurelius (AD 180), emphasis on social and political developments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 2Q96 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST/ITAL) 3P06.
*CLAS 2Q96
History of the Roman Republic
(also offered as HIST 2Q96 and ITAL 2Q96)
History of Rome to the Battle of Actium (31 BC), emphasis on social and political developments from the Gracchi to Julius Caesar.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 1P92 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST/ITAL) 3P05.
*CLAS 3F75
Archaeological Practicum in Mediterranean Lands
(also offered as HIST 3F75)
Field work including excavation, surveys, lectures, demonstrations and study tours of ancient sites, monuments and museums.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25 or permission of the Department.
Note: offered in the Spring or Summer session for four to six weeks of intensive study abroad. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*CLAS 3M20-3M29
Study in Mediterranean Lands
(also offered as VISA 3M20-3M29)
Topographical investigations of ancient sites and monuments. Study tours of the great cities and museums of the Mediterranean world emphasizing the art and architecture of the Prehistoric, Classical and later periods.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: offered in the Spring or Summer Session for two to four weeks of intensive study abroad. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
CLAS 3P08
History of the Hellenistic World
History of the Greek world (323-31 BCE) following the death of Alexander the Great, and the rise of successor states in Greece, Egypt and Asia Minor to the death of Cleopatra.
Lecture, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 1P91, 2P94, 3P25.
*CLAS 3P09
The Later Roman Empire
(also offered as ITAL 3P09 and MARS 3P09)
History of the Roman Empire from the death of Marcus Aurelius to late Antiquity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 1P92, 2P97, 3P23.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4P55.
CLAS 3P15
Homer and Greek Epic
The Iliad and the Odyssey of Homer, their influence and reception.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: one of CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 1P95, 1P97, 2P52 recommended.
CLAS 3P16
Vergil and Roman Epic
The Aeneid and other works of Vergil, Ovid's Metamorphoses, and other epics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: one of CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 1P95, 1P97, 2P52 recommended.
CLAS 3P17
Greek Tragedy
Tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides. Origins and development of tragedy. Reception of Greek tragedy in Rome. Authors and works may vary.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: one of CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 1P95, 1P97, 2P52 recommended.
CLAS 3P18
Greek and Roman Comedy
Origins, development, and reception of Greek and Roman comedy and related genres, such as satire and romance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: one of CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 1P95, 1P97 recommended.
*CLAS 3P22
Art and Architecture of the Roman Republic and Early Empire
(also offered as ITAL 3P22 and VISA 3P22)
Art and architecture of the cultures of the Italian peninsula, in the first millennium BC, within the framework of cultural change and external influences.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from CLAS or VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 recommended.
*CLAS 3P23
Art and Architecture of the Roman Empire
(also offered as ITAL 3P23 and VISA 3P23)
Roman art and architecture from Augustus to Late Antiquity. Christian art and architecture and the influence of Roman aesthetics on the Renaissance and beyond.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from CLAS or VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 recommended.
*CLAS 3P24
Art and Architecture of Early Greece
(also offered as VISA 3P24)
Greek art and architecture from the end of the Bronze Age through the end of the Archaic period within the framework of historical and cultural change.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from CLAS or VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 recommended.
*CLAS 3P25
Art and Architecture of Classical Greece and the Hellenistic World
(also offered as VISA 3P25)
Greek art and architecture from the early Classical era through the Hellenistic period within the framework of historical and cultural change.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from CLAS or VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 recommended.
CLAS 3P31
The Art and Archaeology of Pompeii
Roman art and archaeology from Pompeii. Topics include domestic architecture and urbanization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 1P93, 1P94, 1P95, 1P97, 2P32, 2P34, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (VISA) 3V31 and VISA 3P31.
CLAS 3P32
The Archaeology of Ancient Shipwrecks
Introduction to maritime archaeology and the role of the sea in the social, economic, military, political and technological life of the ancient Mediterranean.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 1P93, 1P94, 1P95, 1P97, 2P32, 2P34, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99.
#CLAS 3P36
Digital Innovations: History and Computing I
(also offered as HIST 3P36 and IASC 3P36)
Explores innovative, digital methods historians are using to research, express and teach the past.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: practical component features introduction to 3D modelling.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST/IASC) 3F31.
#CLAS 3P37
Digital Innovations: History and Computing II
(also offered as HIST 3P37 and IASC 3P37)
Surveys ways historians have used computation to transform our understanding of the past.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: practical component features introduction to more advanced methods for 3D modelling.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST/IASC) 3F31.
CLAS 3P60
Ancient Judaisms and Judaic Societies: From Cyrus to Mohammed
Examination of evidence for major forms of Judaism and their relation to social, cultural, administrative and political institutions.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 2P60.
*CLAS 3P61
Gender and Society in Ancient Mediterranean Cultures
(also offered as HIST 3P61 and WGST 3P61)
Ancient constructions of femininity and masculinity and their relationship to the social, political and legal systems of the Greco-Roman world. Cultural regions vary.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 2P61, HIST 1P98, 1P99, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
*CLAS 3P62
The Ancient Household
(also offered as WGST 3P62)
Social structure, gender and class roles, religious rituals; Mediterranean domestic space and community relationships, urban infrastructure and social networks.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 2P61, WGST 1F90.
#CLAS 3P63
Western Diasporas in the Ancient and Modern Eras
(also offered as HIST 3P63)
Reception, presence and experience of migrant and immigrant peoples as cultural, religious and ethnic minorities in both ancient and modern times.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*CLAS 3P65
Ancient Law in the Near Eastern and Mediterranean Lands
(also offered as HIST 3P65)
Principal codified legal corpora of the ancient world, including Mesopotamia, the Levant (Land of Israel), Greece and Rome.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
CLAS 3V30-3V39
Survey Topics in Mediterranean Art and Archaeology
Topics in Mediterranean art, architecture and archaeology, offering an overview of selected chronological periods, geographic regions and artistic disciplines.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 1P93, 1P95, 1P97, 2P32, 2P34, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99.
CLAS 4P20
Archaeology of Technology
Ancient technologies from an archaeological perspective, focusing on the prehistoric cultures of the Aegean and Eastern Mediterranean.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 2P32, 2P34, CLAS 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3V30-3V39 or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4P22
Archaeology of Death
Ancient burial customs, concentrating on the cultures of the prehistoric Mediterranean, emphasizing mortuary theory.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3V30-3V39 or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4P28
Archaeological Ethics
Ethical, legal and practical dimensions of Classical Archaeology. Topics include looting and the antiquities trade, maritime archaeology and treasure hunting, archaeology as a profession, educational outreach, and museum exhibition.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3V30-3V39.
CLAS 4P31
Art and Archaeology of Etruscan Italy
Etruscan culture through its monuments and material remains from the eighth to third centuries BCE.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, ITAL 2P92, VISA 2P41, 3P52.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in VISA 4P31.
CLAS 4P34
Aegean Bronze Age
Development of the Bronze Age cultures of the Aegean basin from 3000 to 1100 BC emphasizing art and architecture of the Minoans on Crete and the Mycenaeans of the Greek mainland.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3V30-3V39, ITAL 2P92, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, VISA 2P41, 3P52 or permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (VISA) 4V34 and VISA 4P34.
CLAS 4P60
Slaves and Slavery in the Greek World
Theoretical approaches to, practices of and attitudes toward slavery including the experiences of slaves and masters.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4P63
Children and Childhood in the Ancient Mediterranean World
Topics include education, child labour, play, religious rituals, burial and commemoration.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4V68.
CLAS 4P64
Food and Dining in the Ancient World
Food production and social rituals of dining in ancient Greece and Rome through literary and material evidence, experiential reconstruction of ancient recipes.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4P65
Disasters in the Ancient Mediterranean World
Natural and human-made disasters in antiquity including volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, famines, plagues and slave revolts. Impact, response, recovery and reporting of such events.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4P66
Sparta in Context
Socio-political institutions, social roles and organization, rituals and material culture, including representations of Sparta in various media.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4V66.
CLAS 4P67
Nature and the Roman Landscape
Cultural attitudes towards nature and construction of identity through landscape in Roman art and literature.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4P68
Augustus and the Roman Revolution
Political, social and cultural history of the Augustan Age, from the Late Republic to the Early Empire.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4P69
Empire and Environment
Ethnography and environmental impact of Roman Empire. Focus on indigenous responses to Roman presence, cartographic representations of power, and natural resources.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4V55.
CLAS 4P80
Advanced Archaeological Fieldwork in Greece
Fieldwork and study at the archaeological site of Gournia in Crete, Greece. Advanced techniques of archaeological survey, excavations, data recording, finds processing and analysis.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): CLAS 3F75 and permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4V80.
CLAS 4P85
Advanced Archaeological Fieldwork in Italy
Fieldwork and study of archaeological materials under the supervision of a faculty member.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): CLAS 3F75.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4V85.
CLAS 4P86
Advanced Fieldwork in Maritime Archaeology
Fieldwork and study of archaeological materials under the supervision of a faculty member.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): CLAS 3F75.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4V86.
CLAS 4P87
Advanced Archaeological Fieldwork in Sicily
Fieldwork and study of archaeological materials under the supervision of a faculty member.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): CLAS 3F75.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4V87.
CLAS 4V20-4V29
Special Topics in Archaeology
Selected topics and problems in current archaeological research that pertain to the Mediterranean and to the Near East.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 2P32, 2P34, CLAS 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3V30-3V39 or permission of the Department.
*CLAS 4V30-4V39
Special Topics in Mediterranean Art and Architecture
(also offered as VISA 4V30-4V39)
Selected topics and problems in current art, historical and archaeological research pertaining to the art and architecture of the ancient Greek or Roman world.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3V30-3V39, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, VISA 2P41, 2P92, 3P52 or permission of the Department.
*CLAS 4V39
2021-2022: Art and Architecture - Greek Colonization
(also offered as VISA 4V39)
Archaeology of Greek and Punic colonies in the western Mediterranean, primarily during the eighth to fifth centuries BCE.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3V30-3V39, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, VISA 2P41, (2P52), 2P92 or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4V50-4V69
Special Subjects in Classics
Study of a special subject in one of the following areas: Greek and Latin linguistics and literature, Greek and Roman history, philosophy and religion.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4V53
2021-2022: The Ancient Greek Household
Exploration of the physical remains, socio-political importance, and cultural ideas of home through archaeological, visual, and literary evidence.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one CLAS credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the Department.
CLAS 4V80-4V89
Advanced Archaeological Fieldwork and Directed Research
Fieldwork and study of archaeological material under the supervision of a faculty member.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): CLAS 3F75.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
CLAS 4V90-4V99
Advanced Study and Directed Research
Individual study in one of the following areas: archaeology, ancient history, classical literature.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: content to be determined by the interests of the student and the advice of the Department.
GREEK COURSES
GREE 1F00
Language (Introductory)
Fundamentals of ancient Greek. Selections from various Greek authors.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
GREE 2P01
Language and Literature I
Review of grammar. Intermediate selections from Greek authors.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 1F00.
GREE 2P02
Language and Literature II
Further intermediate selections from Greek authors. Greek prose composition.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P01 or permission of the Department.
GREE 4P01
Epic I
Selections from Greek epic. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P02
Epic II
Selections from Greek epic. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P05
Historians I
Selections from the works of the classical Greek historians and biographers. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P06
Historians II
Selections from the works of the classical Greek historians and biographers. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P11
Greek Oratory and Dialogue I
Selections from the Attic orators and/or Greek philosophical works. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P12
Greek Oratory and Dialogue II
Selections from the Attic orators and/or Greek philosophical works. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P21
Greek Tragedy I
One or more Greek tragedies and/or satyr-drama. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P22
Greek Tragedy II
One or more Greek tragedies and/or satyr-drama. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P31
Greek Comedy I
One or more Greek comedies. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P32
Greek Comedy II
One or more Greek comedies. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor:
GREE 4P41
Greek Lyric and Elegy I
Selections from Greek lyric, elegiac, iambic and bucolic poetry. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4P42
Greek Lyric and Elegy II
Selections from Greek Lyric, elegiac, iambic and bucolic poetry. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GREE 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
GREE 4V90-4V99
Advanced Readings and Directed Research
Studies in Greek literature. Content to be determined by the interests of the student and availability of instructors.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
HEBREW COURSE
HEBR 1F00
Introduction to Early Hebrew and Aramaic
Fundamentals of Early Hebrew and Aramaic. Selections from various Early Hebrew and Aramaic authors.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
LATIN COURSES
LATI 1F00
Language (Introductory)
Fundamentals of Latin. Selections from various Latin authors.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
LATI 2P01
Language and Literature I
Review of grammar. Intermediate selections from Latin authors.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 1F00.
LATI 2P02
Language and Literature II
Further intermediate selections from Latin authors. Latin prose composition.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P01 or permission of the Department.
LATI 4P01
Epic, Didactic and Pastoral I
Selections from Vergil, Ovid and Lucretius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P02
Epic, Didactic and Pastoral II
Selections from Vergil, Ovid and Lucretius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P05
Historians I
Selections from Caesar, Sallust, Nepos, Livy, Tacitus and Suetonius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P06
Historians II
Selections from Caesar, Sallust, Nepos, Livy, Tacitus and Suetonius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P07
Historians III
Selections from Nepos' Lives.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P11
Latin Oratory, Letters and Dialogues I
Selections from Cicero, Seneca and Pliny the Younger. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P12
Latin Oratory, Letters and Dialogues II
Selections from Cicero, Seneca and Pliny the Younger. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P21
Roman Elegy I
Selections from Tibullus, Ovid and Propertius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P22
Roman Elegy II
Selections from Tibullus, Ovid and Propertius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P31
Roman Comedy and Satire I
Selections from Plautus, Terence, Juvenal, Martial, Petronius, Seneca and Apuleius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P32
Roman Comedy and Satire II
Selections from Plautus, Terence, Juvenal, Martial, Petronius, Seneca and Apuleius. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P41
Roman Lyric I
Selections from Horace and Catullus. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4P42
Roman Lyric II
Selections from Horace and Catullus. Authors and works vary.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): LATI 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
LATI 4V90-4V99
Advanced Readings and Directed Research
Studies in Latin literature. Content to be determined by the interests of the student and availability of instructors.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Administrative Assistant
Barb Chatwin
905-688-5550, extension 3575
International Centre 309
brocku.ca/classics
Classics is an interdisciplinary field, overlapping all the main areas of the Humanities. The Department of Classics offers: courses in ancient Greek (GREE) and Latin (LATI), and courses in Classics (CLAS), embracing ancient civilization in all its aspects: literature, philosophy, education, history, religion, art and archaeology. In general, CLAS courses require no knowledge of Greek or Latin.
The Department has special resources for learning about the ancient world. Archaeological training sessions are conducted in the summer in Mediterranean lands. Brock is a contributing member to several research and teaching institutions located in the Mediterranean, including the American School of Classical Studies at Athens and the Canadian Institute in Greece. The Brock Museum of Cypriote Antiquities, housed in the Department of Classics, contains a representative collection of art and artifacts from the Neolithic period to beyond the Roman Empire. The Niagara Peninsula Society of the Archaeological Institute of America, in conjunction with the Department, organizes archaeological programs and lectures.
Study tours in the Mediterranean are offered by Classics jointly with Visual Arts and other departments.
Students are encouraged to consult the Chair, Undergraduate Officer or Academic Adviser to discuss their educational objectives and career plans.
Students are advised that graduate programs in Classics require competence in Greek and Latin. Those considering graduate work in Classics should plan to take a minimum of four Greek and/or Latin (GREE/LATI) credits.

14

Communication, Popular Culture and Film
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
CPCF 1F25
Media and Culture: Texts and Practices
Introductory survey of the fields of communication, popular culture and film. Relations among texts, images, representations and socio-cultural practices.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to BCMN, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors.
Administrative Assistant
TBA
905-688-5550, extension 4290
Scotiabank Hall 309
brocku.ca/cpcf
The Department of Communication, Popular Culture and Film offers four separate programs of study in Business Communication, Media and Communication Studies, Film Studies, and Popular Culture. A four-year program leading to the Bachelor of Arts (BA) Honours degree, a 4 Year BA with Major, and a three-year program leading to the BA Pass degree is offered in all four programs. Majors in the Department may complete a Concentration in Digital Culture. Minor programs are available in Digital Culture, Film Studies, Media Studies and Popular Culture for majors in other Departments/Centres as well as a Certificate in Film Studies. In addition, the Department is involved in programs with community colleges which offer students the opportunity to earn a BA Honours Communication Studies, BA Honours Popular Culture or a BA with Major Film Studies degree and a college diploma or certificate.

15

Communication Studies: Business Communication; Media and Communication Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
COMMUNICATION STUDIES COURSES
COMM 1F90
Introduction to Communication and Media Studies
Approaches and issues in communication from both humanities and social science perspectives. Topics include the cultural use of symbols and signs, qualitative and quantitative mass media analysis, critical analysis of texts, the cultural character of the Canadian media and the impact of the media and media institutions within our increasingly digitally mediated lives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors until date specified in Registration guide.
COMM 1P96
Professional Communication
Introduction to theory and practice of professional communication focusing on applied rhetoric for organizational contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BCMN majors until date specified in Registration guide.
COMM 1P97
Introduction to Communication in Business
Theory and practice of business communication; including structures of organizations, strategy, leadership, conflict resolution, ethics, organizational culture; gender and cross-cultural relations in organizations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BCMN and TOUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to BBA majors.
Students will not receive earned credit for COMM 1P97 if MGMT 1P51 has been successfully completed.
*COMM 2F00
New Media Literacy
(also offered as FILM 2F00 and PCUL 2F00)
Practical training in a repertoire of skills and tools essential to functioning in new media environments, and critical analytical training in key issues and theories related to the contemporary information age.
Restriction: students must have minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: this course is offered online.
#COMM 2P14
Technical Writing
(also offered as WRDS 2P14)
Processes of technical writing and editing. Document design for scientific, corporate and industrial communication. Practical experience in the production of technical documents.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P14.
*COMM 2P15
Research Methods in Communication and Culture
(also offered as PCUL 2P15)
Introduction to qualitative and quantitative methods for communication and popular culture research.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 1F90, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 2P16
Communication for Organizations
(also offered as WRDS 2P16)
Theory, strategies and practice of writing for both business and public organizations.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P16.
#COMM 2P18
Reporting and News Writing for Mass Media
(also offered as PCUL 2P18 and WRDS 2P18)
News gathering, writing, and editing for print and electronic media; journalistic style and conventions; interviewing and other information-gathering techniques; editing basics.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL,WRDS (single or combined) majors, RWRT and WRDS minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, PCUL 1F92, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P18.
#COMM 2P20
Theories of Popular Culture
(also offered as FILM 2P20 and PCUL 2P20)
Theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of various forms of popular culture. Critical and research skills specific to studies in popular culture.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined), PCUL majors, DCUL, MEST and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, CANA 1F91, FILM 1F94, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 2P21
Canadian Popular Culture
(also offered as CANA 2P21, FILM 2P21 and PCUL 2P21)
Survey of the media in Canada. Studies in the popular arts, referencing the ways that institutions (CBC, NFB) and selected artists identify and express a Canadian cultural imagination.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, CANA, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, CANA, FILM (single or combined), PCUL majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration Guide.
*COMM 2P26
The Information Society
(also offered as PCUL 2P26)
Concepts such as surveillance, social sorting and control within our networked lives. Historic precursors to computing as well as contemporary and emerging technologies from our everyday lives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, IASC majors and DCUL, MEST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, IASC 1F01 (1F00), PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
COMM 2P50
Communication Theory
Survey of theory, such as cognitive approaches to message reception, symbolic interactionism, interpersonal and group communication theories, communication analysis and theories of the mass media and their functions in society. Criteria to evaluate theories.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single and combined), and PCUL majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, FILM 1F94, PSYC 1F90, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM 2F50.
COMM 2P51
Language and Communication
Interconnections between language and its cultural and communicative meanings in terms of their situational, interactional, and functional features.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 1F90.
COMM 2P52
Nonverbal Communication
Introduction to nonverbal communication in interpersonal, intercultural and mass media contexts. Topics may include kinesics and proxemics, the role of gesture, clothing, and social behaviour in communication.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 1F90.
#COMM 2P54
Documentary Film
(also offered as FILM 2P54 and SOCI 2P54)
History, theory, aesthetics and cultural implications of documentary film and other visual media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
COMM 2P55
Interpersonal Communication
How people use verbal and nonverbal cues to interact in personal and social relationships.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
#COMM 2P56
Canadian Cinema
(also offered as FILM 2P56 and PCUL 2P56)
Critical and historical study of Canadian cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 2P63
Communication Design
(also offered as PCUL 2P63 and WRDS 2P63)
Communication through imagery and typography, including grid usage, composition, visual hierarchy, content development and scale.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, PCUL 1F92, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P63.
COMM 2P65
Organizational Culture
Comparison of competing approaches and contemporary debates in cultural analysis of organizations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 1F90.
#COMM 2P70
Popular Music and Society
(also offered as MUSI 2P70, PCUL 2P70 and SOCI 2P70)
Critical approaches to popular music in its social, cultural, political and economic contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, MUSI (single or combined), PCUL and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in the Registration guide. After that date open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, MUSI (single or combined), PCUL, SOCI (single or combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students, MEST and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, MUSI 1F00, 1F50, PCUL 1F92, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 2P71
Popular Arts and the Modern Middle East
(also offered as HIST 2P71 and PCUL 2P71)
This course examines Middle Eastern popular culture and art from historical perspectives. It explores the influence and role of internet, music, cinema and theater, paintings, sports, foods and fashion in the daily life of people in the Middle East and their historical transformations through modernization and globalization. The course investigates how class, gender, economy and politics shaped and reshaped the artistic representations and popular culture in the region.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*COMM 2P90
Networks, Digital Identities and Interactions
(also offered as IASC 2P90)
Introduction to foundations of the Internet, online communities and social networking. Critical engagement with identity and interactive communication practices in our digitally mediated lives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, IASC 1F01 (1F00), IASC 1P04 and 1P05 or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 2P91
Social Media
(also offered as IASC 2P91 and PCUL 2P91)
Theory, philosophy and politics of Social Media as a communicative mode. Politics of participatory and commodified culture online and processes of planning content to convey a narrative or convene a community.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL, GAMD, IASC majors and DCUL, MEST minors until date specified in the Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, PCUL 1F92, IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 2P92
Hip Hop and the Urban Working Class
(also offered as LABR 2P92 and PCUL 2P92)
Global urban working class life through the lens of hip hop culture. Topics may include the impact of neoliberal globalization, precarious work, the informal economy, and the ways in which race, class and gender shape experiences of social and economic life in the global city.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR 2P91.
#COMM 2P93
Popular Narrative
(also offered as ENGL 2P93, FILM 2P93 and PCUL 2P93)
Analysis of storytelling across different media such as novels, film, television, the Internet and video games.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), FILM (single or combined), PCUL and WRDS (single and combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, FILM 1F94, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 2P94
Popular Cinema
(also offered as FILM 2P94 and PCUL 2P94)
Popular cinema as art and institution emphasizing film genres and cultural contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94, PCUL 1F92.
*COMM 2P98
Media Industries
(also offered as PCUL 2P98 and SOCI 2P98)
Canadian media production in its economic, political and technological environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single and combined), PCUL, SOCI (single and combined) majors, DCUL, MEST, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, PCUL 1F92, SOCI 1F90.
#COMM 2Q91
Ethnography and Popular Culture
(also offered as PCUL 2Q91)
Ethnographic approaches to the study of folk culture and popular entertainment, past and present.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94, PCUL 1F92.
#COMM 2Q96
Art of Activism: Sexuality to Racial Justice
(also offered as FILM 2Q96, PCUL 2Q96, VISA 2Q96 and WGST 2Q96)
Introduction to the ways marginalized and criminalized populations employ the arts of social change. Topics may include feminist activism, migrant rights, defunding the police and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Artists, film makers and activists in Canada will be featured.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
#COMM 2Q98
Introduction to Canadian Public Administration
(also offered as LABR 2Q98 and POLI 2Q98)
Political, legal and managerial dimensions of public administration. Topics include the structure and management of public organizations; government reform; political-bureaucratic relations; human resources and budgetary processes; ethics and accountability.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
COMM 3P01
Directed Reading
Tutorial combined with one or more research papers or projects in an area of Communication Studies of mutual interest to the student and instructor.
Restriction: permission of the Undergraduate Program Adviser.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member in consultation with the Undergraduate Program Adviser and must submit a written contract signed by the faculty member to the Undergraduate Program Adviser before registration.
#COMM 3P03
Advanced Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as ENGL 3P03, FILM 3P03 and PCUL 3P03)
Case studies in the adaptation of popular texts across media.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), FILM (single or combined), PCUL and WRDS (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P93.
*COMM 3P15
Media Analysis
(also offered as PCUL 3P15)
Introduction to methods of media analysis. Comparison of theoretical and methodological approaches to mediated content, production, consumption, and reception.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P15.
#COMM 3P17
Politics and the Mass Media in Canada
(also offered as POLI 3P17)
Canadian mass media and their relationship to the political process.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P50 (2F50), one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 3P18
Audience Studies
(also offered as FILM 3P18 and PCUL 3P18)
Theoretical and methodological approaches to the understanding of audiences for media and cultural products, including print, sound, film, broadcasting and digital media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20.
*COMM 3P19
Communication and Media Policy
(also offered as PCUL 3P19)
Historical trends in objectives and implementation of communication policies. Topics include public broadcasting, subsidies, protection, regulation and effect of international trade on domestic media policy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors, DCUL and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P98.
#COMM 3P20
Television Studies
(also offered as FILM 3P20 and PCUL 3P20)
Historical, theoretical and critical approaches to television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined), PCUL, STAC majors and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3P21
Canadian Television
(also offered as FILM 3P21 and PCUL 3P21)
Historical, theoretical and critical approaches to Canadian television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined), PCUL, STAC majors and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 3P20 or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 3P22
Media and Sport
(also offered as PCUL 3P22 and SPMA 3P22)
Relations between sport organizations, the mass media and popular culture. Topics may include the commodification of sport, media rights, sponsorship, fan cultures, and the representation of sports in journalism and popular entertainment.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P98, SPMA 2P65 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM (PCUL/SPMA) 2P22.
*COMM 3P26
Social and Cultural Aspects of Digital Gaming
(also offered as IASC 3P26 and PCUL 3P26)
Critical investigation of digital gaming, particularly of the interrelationships among past and present games, culture and media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20, or IASC 1P04 and 1P05.
#COMM 3P33
Psychology of Intergroup Behaviour
(also offered as PSYC 3P33)
Social psychological theories and research in the area of intergroup relations and intergroup conflict. Topics include realistic conflict theory, social identity theory, social exchange, relative deprivation and research on intergroup perceptions and attitudes. Current issues/controversies and implications for the resolution of intergroup conflict.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PSYC (single or combined) majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
COMM 3P51
Language and Public Communication
Constitutive function of language in public affairs. Topics may include the role of language in public discourse, social issues and movements, and social, political and cultural activism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P50 (2F50).
#COMM 3P54
Issues in Documentary Film
(also offered as FILM 3P54 and SOCI 3P54)
Advanced studies in selected aspects of documentary film and other related media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P54.
*COMM 3P55
Advertising in Context
(also offered as PCUL 3P55)
Methodological and critical approaches to contemporary advertising in its cultural, social and political-economic contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors, MEST and PCUL minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3P56
Issues in Canadian Cinema
(also offered as FILM 3P56)
Advanced studies in selected aspects of Canadian cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P56.
COMM 3P62
Public Relations and Integrated Marketing Communication
Examination of the public relations process; role, functions, historical evolution and relevance to effective marketing communication strategy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
*COMM 3P63
Digital Design and Communication
(also offered as PCUL 3P63 and WRDS 3P63)
Introduction to digital design focusing on visual communication by using Adobe software and the Macintosh computer.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL, WRDS (single or combined) majors, RWRT and WRDS minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P63.
#COMM 3P73
Popular Music and Youth Culture
(also offered as MUSI 3P73, PCUL 3P73 and SOCI 3P73)
Cultural relation between young people and popular music. Topics include music's role in the formation of identity, the connection between musical taste and various forms of youth fashion or style, and the impact of new technologies on the ways in which young people access music.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P70 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3P75
Cultures of Consumption
(also offered as PCUL 3P75)
Commodities within social life. Topics may include digital consumerism, value creation, modes of exchange, shopping spaces, fashion cycles, consumer identity, status formation, lifestyle construction and ethical consumption debates.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20.
#COMM 3P80
Psychology of Interpersonal Behaviour
(also offered as PSYC 3P80)
Social psychology of interpersonal attraction and relationships, as studied through experimental, correlational and longitudinal designs. Reinforcement, exchange, attributional, equity and balance models. Levels of relationships. Aspects of the maintenance and dissolution of relationships and of interpersonal psychopathology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PSYC (single or combined) majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: PSYC 2P30 (2F30) recommended.
*COMM 3P90
Advanced Topics in Digital Culture
(also offered as IASC 3P90)
Contemporary and digital culture issues emerging from industry practices, scholarly research and user activities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 2P26, 2P90, 2P91 or permission of the instructor.
COMM 3P91
Information Technology: Policies and Issues
Historical and contemporary perspectives on information policy. Topics may include privacy, security, copyright, intellectual property, open source software, Internet regulation, digital literacy, and universal access.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 2P26, 2P90, 2P91 or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 3P92
Technology and Culture
(also offered as IASC 3P92 and PCUL 3P92)
Critical analysis of the ways in which culture and technology are mutually productive of one another using historical, contemporary and emerging examples drawn from everyday life.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 2P26, 2P90, 2P91 or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 3P93
Indigenous People in Media and Popular Culture
(also offered as CANA 3P93, PCUL 3P93 and SOCI 3P93)
Historical and contemporary representations of Indigenous people in mainstream media and popular culture. Indigenous interventions in production of cultural content and media structures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, CANA, PCUL, SOCI (single or combined) majors and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 1F90, CANA 1F91, SOCI 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3P94
Film Genre
(also offered as FILM 3P94 and PCUL 3P94)
Genre theory, its history, development and application to cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3P96
Issues in Popular Culture
(also offered as FILM 3P96 and PCUL 3P96)
Specialized studies in popular culture and its role in specific social, historical or theoretical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 and 2P21 or FILM 2P90 (2F90).
#COMM 3P97
Gender and Cinema to the 1960s
(also offered as FILM 3P97, PCUL 3P97 and WGST 3P97)
Representation of gender, sexuality, race and class, and implications of spectatorship and ideology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90), one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3P98
Gender and Contemporary Cinema
(also offered as FILM 3P98, PCUL 3P98 and WGST 3P98)
Representation of gender, sexuality, race and class via ideology, feminism, queer theory, and spectatorship in film and video texts since the 1960s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90), one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3Q90
Indigenous Cultural Production and Activism
(also offered as DART 3Q90, INDG 3Q90, PCUL 3Q90, SOCI 3Q90 and WGST 3Q90)
Draws on cultural, experiential and theoretical texts to better understand Indigenous epistemologies. Examples include ImagineNative and community arts projects.
Lectures, fieldwork, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, DART 1P91, one INDG (ABST) credit, PCUL 1F92, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#COMM 3Q91
The History and Culture of Role-Playing Games
(also offered as PCUL 3Q91)
Tabletop gaming culture from the 1970s to the 2000s. Topics may include realism versus fantasy, moral panics and nostalgia.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 or CPCF 1F25.
Note: labs introduce basic game design.
#COMM 3Q92
Food and Popular Culture
(also offered as PCUL 3Q92)
Studies of food in media and everyday life. Topics may include food on screens and in print; celebrity chefs; food and meaning making; cooking and domestic sphere; culture and table manners; taste; political economy of food; contemporary food rituals; dietary subcultures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
COMM 3Q93
Issues in International Communication
Current theory and research in international communication; evolution of communication networks and global media flows within their historical, political and economic contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
#COMM 3Q94
Television Genres
(also offered as FILM 3Q94 and PCUL 3Q94)
Genre theory and its application to popular television.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 3Q95
Issues in Intercultural Communication
Current theory and research in intercultural communication; relationship between communication and culture; comparison of communication codes and norms emphasizing face-to-face interaction.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P50 (2F50) or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3Q97
Events Management
(also offered as PCUL 3Q97 and TOUR 3Q97)
Introduction to events management. Topics include event types and contexts; conceptualization, planning and design; marketing and sponsorship; budgeting and financial management; managing human and volunteer resources; staging and logistics; risk management, evaluation and sustainability.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined), PCUL, TMGT and TREN majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 or TOUR 2P31.
*COMM 3Q98
The Psychology of Screens (Television and Beyond)
(also offered as IASC 3Q98, PCUL 3Q98 and PSYC 3Q98)
Cognitive responses to mediated communication including television and new/emerging information and communication technologies. Focus on cognitive effects, theories and research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, IASC 1F01, IASC 1P04 and 1P05, PSYC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM (PCUL/PSYC) 3P95 and COMM 3Q20.
COMM 3Q99
Conflict and Negotiation
Advanced study of interpersonal communication focused upon conflict. Topics include conflict models, alternative dispute resolution and negotiation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P50 (2F50), 2P55 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3R90
Sound and Vision: The Rockumentary
(also offered as FILM 3R90 and PCUL 3R90)
Intersection of the music and film industries through an in-depth study of the popular music documentary (rockumentary), its history and its contexts.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 1F94 and one of COMM 2P20, 2P54, 2P70.
COMM 3V50-3V59
Special Topics in Communication Studies
Topics selected on the basis of instructional expertise and student interest.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P50 (2F50), 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 3V50
2021-2022: Applied Projects in Communication
(also offered as PCUL 3V50)
Application of small group communication and problem-solving tools to projects with community partners. Topics may include strategies for small group communication and leadership, problem analysis and project planning in the workplace, and career preparation for communication and creative industries.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL and PCLN majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
COMM 3V90-3V99
Advanced Topics in Communication Studies
Topics selected on the basis of instructional expertise and student interest.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 3V90
2021-2022: The Superhero in American Culture
(also offered as FILM 3V90 and PCUL 3V90)
The superhero as a cultural symbol. Topics include historical contexts, theories of genre and issues of representation. Examples drawn from comic books, cartoons, television shows and films from the mid-1930s to the present.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 5 hours per week.
COMM 4F80
Directed Reading
Directed individual or group reading in an area of Communication Studies.
Restriction: open to BMCN, COMM and MCMN majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 80 percent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Undergraduate Program Adviser.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member in consultation with the Undergraduate Program Adviser and must submit a written contract, signed by the faculty member, to the Undergraduate Program Adviser, before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's COMM 4F99 thesis.
COMM 4F99
Honours Thesis
Thesis to be based on individual study and research carried out under the supervision of a faculty adviser.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 80 percent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Undergraduate Program Adviser.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member in consultation with the Undergraduate Program Adviser and must submit a written contract, signed by the faculty member, to the Undergraduate Program Adviser, before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's COMM 4F80 directed reading.
#COMM 4P03
Applied Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as ENGL 4P03, FILM 4P03 and PCUL 4P03)
Practical, historical and theoretical approaches to popular narratives.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), FILM (single or combined), PCUL and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): COMM 3P03.
#COMM 4P06
Advanced Studies in Popular Culture
(also offered as FILM 4P06 and PCUL 4P06)
Issues in popular culture and its role in specific social, historical and theoretical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 3P96.
#COMM 4P10
Language and Discourse: Theory and Practice
(also offered as ENGL 4P10 and WRDS 4P10)
Analysis of the relation between stylistic features and discursive contexts; encoding and enacting of social worlds and relations in text (both literary and non-literary); introduction to the field of discourse studies in general, emphasizing critical discourse analysis.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P10.
*COMM 4P14
Advanced Research in Cultural Industries
(also offered as PCUL 4P14)
Advanced research into the national and international development, operations, and political economy of a single cultural industry. Topics may include press, periodicals, radio, music, film, television or interactive media industries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors and MEST minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 4P18
Media and the Natural Environment
(also offered as PCUL 4P18)
Media constructions of the natural environment, environmental movements and environmental issues such as pollution, climate change and consumerism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors and MEST minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 4P23
Research on Media and Popular Culture
(also offered as PCUL 4P23 and SOCI 4P23)
Advanced research seminar on the relations between mass media and popular culture.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL, SOCI (single or combined) majors, MEST, CRAS and SOCI minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P98 (3P14) or 3P15.
#COMM 4P28
Special Topics in Video Production
(also offered as FILM 4P28)
Theory, practice and technique of filmmaking, focusing on idea development, creative process and methods of production.
Workshop, seminar, 3 hours per week; additional production time as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): three FILM credits.
Note: enrolment limited to 15 students. Materials fee required.
#COMM 4P30
Theories of Mass Culture
(also offered as FILM 4P30 and PCUL 4P30)
Studies in cultural theory and its application to mass media texts, referencing the work of the Frankfurt School, French Structuralism and British Cultural Studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined), PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 4P31
Theories of the Visible
(also offered as FILM 4P31 and PCUL 4P31)
Central 20th-century developments in theories of visibility and their relevance to the field of media studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 4P32
Comparative Mass Media
(also offered as POLI 4P32)
Selected problems concerning the mass media and the political process in Canada and other countries.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and either a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): COMM 3P17 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2F30 strongly recommended.
COMM 4P33
Gender and Communication
Scholarly theory, social scientific studies, and critical analyses of gender and communication across a range of contexts, including personal relationships, organizations and the media. Application of course material to everyday communication and interaction.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#COMM 4P34
Taste and Cultural Politics
(also offered as FILM 4P34 and PCUL 4P34)
Application of cultural theories to the analysis of taste, distinction, class, cultural standards and moral panics, transgression and trash culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMCN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4P35
Data and Society
Topics may include open data, big data, social media and algorithms.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will analyse a data set and apply their findings.
COMM 4P50
Ethnography of Communication
Anthropological approaches to cultural variations in communication, particularly verbal communication. Purposes to which speech is put and the way it is organized for these purposes in different cultural contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4P51
Language and Power
Role of language in the creation and maintenance of ideology and power structures. Topics include political rhetoric, religious discourse, language in the professions (law, medicine).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4P53
Interpersonal Dialogue
Theories of dialogue developed for relational communication and their application to relational processes such as listening and conflict.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 4P55
History of Advertising
(also offered as PCUL 4P55)
Historical research into the development of Canadian advertising practices in an international context. Evaluation of the cultural and economic impact of advertising on the mass media and the role of advertising in the formation of a consumer culture.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4P57
Crisis Communication
Examination of public relations crisis communication theory and its practical applications including the pre-crisis , crisis response , and recovery stages, with an emphasis on crisis response strategies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): COMM 3P62.
#COMM 4P58
Ecocinema: History, Theory and Practice
(also offered as FILM 4P58 and PCUL 4P58)
Topics may include climate change, species degradation/extinction, resource extraction and other industrial practices (including hydrocarbonized film industrial practices), forced migration, slow violence and eco-trauma, as well as questions of scale, magnitude and the sublime in nature.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Note: completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM (FILM/PCUL) 4V58.
#COMM 4P59
Writing Cultural Criticism for the Media
(also offered as FILM 4P59 and PCUL 4P59)
Skills and techniques for reviewing contemporary media culture for publication.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single and combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Note: weekly writing assignments discussed in a workshop context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM (FILM/PCUL) 4V59.
#COMM 4P61
Conventions of Screen Realism
(also offered as FILM 4P61 and PCUL 4P61)
How representation and perception of reality have evolved with technology and aesthetics, from the Lumires to reality television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4P65
Special Topics in Business Communication I
Contemporary issues for business or nonprofit organizations, such as digital communications, crisis communications, ethics or organizational communication.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4P66
Special Topics in Business Communication II
Contemporary issues for business or nonprofit organizations, such as digital communications, crisis communications, ethics or organizational communication.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4P80
Directed Reading
Directed individual or group readings in an area of Communication Studies.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with a minimum of 14.0 credits, a minimum of 75 per cent major average, approval to year 4 (honours), and permission of the Department.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member, in consultation with the Academic Adviser and must submit a written proposal, signed by the Undergraduate Program Adviser before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's COMM 4F99 thesis.
COMM 4P90
Advanced Research in Digital Culture
Advanced research on the social and cultural implications of computer mediated communication and digital media.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 3P90, 3P91, 3P92.
COMM 4P91
Directed Reading in Digital Culture
Tutorial combined with one or more research papers or projects in an area of Digital Culture of mutual interest to the student and instructor.
Restriction: permission of the Undergraduate Program Adviser.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member in consultation with the Undergraduate Program Adviser and must submit a written contract signed by the faculty member to the Undergraduate Program Adviser before registration.
COMM 4V50-4V59
Contemporary Research in Communication Studies
Special topics in contemporary communication research.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4V52
2021-2022: Cultures of Entrepreneurialism
Critical approaches to key texts and practices regarding starting a new business, venture or pursuing new ideas. Topics may include discourses of leadership, negotiation, management of problems, priorities, people, tasks and time.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
*COMM 4V57
2021-2022: Visual Culture
(also offered as FILM 4V57 and PCUL 4V57)
Survey of selected practices and phenomena related to the visuality in media and culture. Primary focus is on the role of visuality in the production of knowledge and power relations. Topics may include: scientific visualization, themed environments, photographic cultures, museums, and cartography.
Lecture, Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4V60-4V69
Historical Perspectives in Communication Studies
Special topics in communication history.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
COMM 4V70-4V79
Special Topics in International Communication
Special topics in international communication.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
INTERNSHIP COURSES
COMM 4F00
Internship in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 160 hour placement.
Restriction: open to BCMN and MCMN majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement experience within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM 4P00, 4P01, FILM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, PCUL 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
COMM 4P00
Placement in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 80 hour placement.
Restriction: open to BCMN and MCMN majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM 4F00, FILM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, PCUL 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
COMM 4P01
Placement in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 80 hour placement.
Restriction: open to BCMN and MCMN majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 4P00.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM 4F00, FILM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, PCUL 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
Administrative Assistant
TBA
905-688-5550, extension 4290
Scotiabank Hall 309
brocku.ca/cpcf
The Department of Communication, Popular Culture and Film offers four separate programs of study in Business Communication, Media and Communication Studies, Film Studies, and Popular Culture. A four-year program leading to the Bachelor of Arts (BA) Honours degree, a 4 Year BA with Major, and a three-year program leading to the BA Pass degree is offered in all four programs. In addition, the Department is involved in programs with community colleges which offer students the opportunity to earn an honours degree in Communication Studies and a college diploma or certificate.
Business Communication is an interdisciplinary program combining the study of communication with the study of some aspects of business. The program aims to equip the student with a sound theoretical basis for analysing and practicing communication within the business environment.
Students admitted to Business Communication may continue in the program upon successful completion of Years 1 and 2 with a minimum 65 percent major average in each year. A student with a major average lower than 65 percent will not be permitted to continue in Business Communication. Students wishing to proceed to Year 4 Honours require a minimum 70 percent major average. Students wishing to proceed to Year 4 with Major in Business Communication require a minimum 65 percent major average.
Media and Communication Studies is an interdisciplinary program that focuses on the impact of media and communication in the creation of meaning, identity, and social change, emphasizing the study of media content, audiences, and institutions in their political, economic, and social contexts in Canada and elsewhere.

16

Community Health

17

Computer Science
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
APPLIED COMPUTING COURSES
*APCO 1P00
Introduction to Media Computation
(also offered as IASC 1P00)
Programming by example, designing and debugging of programs, encoding and manipulation of text and graphics, file processing, simple HTML and automatic generation, and manipulating and parsing of web pages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: not open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors.
Note: prior computer experience is not required.
*APCO 1P01
Fluency With Technology
(also offered as IASC 1P01)
Skills, concepts and capabilities of computers, networks and the Internet. Topics include representation of information, current hardware, software and network technologies, modelling with Excel, presentations with PowerPoint, Internet searching and basic web page development with HTML.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors.
Note: some prior computer experience is preferred but not required.
#APCO 1P30
Programming for Interactive Media
(also offered as IASC 1P30)
Introduction to contemporary programming syntax including for classes, functions, properties and events for developing interactive media applications.
Lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: enrolment limited to 20 students.
#APCO 1P50
Integrity and Literacy in the Information Age
(also offered as COSC 1P50 and IASC 1P50)
Issues in use of information technology including historic and social perspectives; legal, ethical and moral issues; intellectual property, licensing and copyright; privacy and freedom of expression; professional conduct and information literacy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; seminar, 1.5 hours per week.
Note: seminars may be offered online. This course involves seminars and considerable written work. A good command of written and spoken English is required.
*APCO 1P93
Applied Programming
(also offered as IASC 1P93)
Modern software techniques including problem solving and design of effective algorithms, structured program design methodology, subprogram library usage, documentation, correctness, floating-point arithmetic and error analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: not open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors.
Prerequisite(s): APCO 1P00 or 4U Mathematics credit.
*APCO 2P11
Personal Computers and Networks
(also offered as IASC 2P11)
Inner workings of modern computers from a user's point of view. Understanding the hardware, network and system software. Topics include CPUs, memory, video, input/output, networks, security, installation of operating systems and hands-on trouble shooting.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APCO minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET majors and APCO minors.
Prerequisite(s): APCO 1P01 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in APCO 2P01.
#APCO 2P61
Website Creation
(also offered as STAC 2P61 and VISA 2P61)
Creative approaches to basic technical and design foundations of website design and development. Processing and management of images and other media assets, structuring websites, development tools and applications, web hosting and dissemination strategies. Contemporary web-based art practices within the broader history of cultural production.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to STAC, VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and APCO minors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1P95 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#APCO 2P89
Internet Technologies
(also offered as COSC 2P89 and IASC 2P89)
Concepts and techniques for building and maintaining advanced interactive Web sites. Topics include XML and SGML, database connectivity and forms handling, basic animation, graphics optimization for the Web, scripting, advanced searching and Web design for accessibility.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/seminar, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): APCO 1P00 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P01 (minimum 60 percent) or COSC 1P03 (minimum 60 percent).
APCO 2P99
Project in Applied Computing
Development project in computing, Internet programming or directed reading essay under the supervision of a faculty member.
Prerequisite(s): two APCO credits (minimum 60 percent).
Note: students may propose their own projects for departmental approval or may apply for a project proposed by a faculty member. Further information (including project guidelines and project list) is available on the department Web pages.
#APCO 3P94
Introduction to Human Computer Interaction
(also offered as COSC 3P94 and IASC 3P94)
Human factors in the design and support of computing systems. Design methodologies such as GOMS, TAGs and Task Analysis. Design principles relating to various interaction paradigms.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/seminar, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two credits from APCO (minimum 60 percent), COSC (minimum 60 percent), IASC (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COMPUTER SCIENCE COURSES
COSC 1P02
Introduction to Computer Science
Foundations of Computer Science and computer programming in a high-level language (normally Java). Topics include computer fundamentals, representation of information, problem solving and software development, programming language syntax and semantics, methods, input/output, control structures and data types.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Note: may be offered online or as a blended format. Students with considerable prior programming experience in a high-level language such as Pascal, Java, C++ or Ada may be granted exemption from this course at the discretion of the Chair.
COSC 1P03
Introduction to Data Structures
Programming and problem solving in a high-level programming language (normally Java). Data structures including arrays and linked-lists. Modularity, abstraction and abstract data types including stacks, queues and lists. Introduction to searching and sorting, recursion, algorithm analysis and object-orientation.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 1P02 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the Chair.
Note: students with a minimum 80 percent in APCO 1P00 and changing their major to COSC may be permitted to enter directly into COSC 1P03. Consult the Chair.
*COSC 1P50
Integrity and Literacy in the Information Age
(also offered as APCO 1P50 and IASC 1P50)
Issues in use of information technology including historic and social perspectives; legal, ethical and moral issues; intellectual property, licensing and copyright; privacy and freedom of expression; professional conduct and information literacy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; seminar, 1.5 hours per week.
Note: seminars may be offered online. This course involves seminars and considerable written work. A good command of written and spoken English is required.
COSC 2P03
Advanced Data Structures
Implementation and use of advanced data structures including trees, graphs, hash tables and advanced list structures, sorting and searching, recursion and traversals. Analysis of algorithms.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET, GAMP and NEUR Neurocomputing stream majors.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 1P03 (minimum 60 percent), MATH 1P66 and 1P67.
COSC 2P05
Programming Languages
Fundamental concepts of programming languages including syntax, semantics, program translation, virtual machines, control, data types, multi-threading, exception handling and abstraction mechanisms. Introduction to programming paradigms including imperative, applicative, logic and object-oriented.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COSC 2P90 and 3P05.
COSC 2P12
Introduction to Computer Architecture
Evolution of digital computer. Computer organization including functional units, instruction cycle, control, buses and memory. Instruction types and memory access, instruction sequencing and call/return. Basic assembly language programming.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 1P03 (minimum 60 percent).
COSC 2P13
Computer Systems
Operating systems and networking. Resource sharing including file, processor, I/O and memory management. Concurrency including: context switching, interprocess communication, and synchronization. Protection and security including encryption. Distributed systems and networking including: ISO model and packet routing.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent) and COSC 2P12 (minimum 60 percent) for COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET and NEUR neurocomputing majors; COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent), CPCF 1F25 and IASC 2P04 for GAMP majors.
*COSC 2P89
Internet Technologies
(also offered as APCO 2P89 and IASC 2P89)
Concepts and techniques required for building and maintaining advanced interactive Web sites. Topics include XML and SGML, database connectivity and forms handling, basic animation, graphics optimization for the Web, scripting, advanced searching, Web design for accessibility.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/seminar, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 1P03 (minimum 60 percent) or APCO 1P00 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P01 (minimum 60 percent).
COSC 2P95
Programming in C++ with Applications
C++ as a second language. Basic language structure, data structures, libraries for application. Introduction to object-orientation and UNIX commands.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; labs 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of COSC 1P03, APCO 1P93, MATH 2P40.
Note: students should select the lab appropriate for their application domain (Computer Science or Mathematics).
#COSC 2P96
Introduction to 3D Modelling and Animation
(also offered as STAC 2P96 and VISA 2P96)
Concepts and skills of 3D modelling and rendering using Autodesk Maya. Approaches to building models, using texturizing, lighting, cameras and rendering as well as basic animation techniques. Relevant historical and theoretical perspectives on 3D and virtuality situating 3D within creative process and broader critical practices in cultural production.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), IASC (single or combined), STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of four COSC credits, IASC 1F01 (1F00), one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent).
Note: students will need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC 2P96.
COSC 3P03
Algorithms
Design and analysis of computer algorithms. Topics include asymptotic notations, solving recurrences, order statistics, general algorithm design techniques such as divide-and-conquer, greedy algorithms, dynamic programming, backtracking and branch-and-bound. Graph and string algorithms. Introduction to NP-Completeness and complexity theory.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 3P32
Introduction to Database Systems
Fundamental database concepts: specification, design and applications; various models including the relational model; normal forms, efficiency considerations, queries using SQL, database administration and security. Practical experience (normally ORACLE) in a group project.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COSC 2P32.
COSC 3P71
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
Historic and philosophical foundations of AI; knowledge representation and reasoning; problem spaces; blind and heuristic search; adversarial search in game playing; machine learning; social and ethical considerations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 3P91
Advanced Object-Oriented Programming
Topics may include graphical user interfaces, animation, sound, music, networking, parallelism, client-server and XML using game design as an example. Object-oriented program design including UML and design patterns. Introduction to advanced Java APIs.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two COSC credits or permission of instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COSC 3P40.
COSC 3P92
Computer Architecture
Topics include buses, internal and external memory, I/O and interfacing, computer arithmetic, instruction sets, RISCs, microprogrammed control, parallel organization.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P12 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 3P93
Parallel Computing
Origins of parallelism, classification of designs, characterization of performance. Pipelined computers: selection and comparison, case studies. Processor arrays: switching networks, case studies. Parallel languages: general principles, parallel constructs, vectorizing compilers, issues of portability. Practical exposure to a parallel programming language and parallel computing hardware. Parallel algorithms: general principles, recurrences, parallel approach to data structures and computational structures. Future trends: technology, design limitations, future supercomputers.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P13 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
*COSC 3P94
Introduction to Human Computer Interaction
(also offered as APCO 3P94 and IASC 3P94)
Human factors in the design and support of computing systems. Design methodologies such as GOMS, TAGs and Task Analysis. Design principles relating to various interaction paradigms.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/seminar, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two credits from APCO (minimum 60 percent), COSC (minimum 60 percent), IASC (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 3P97
Mobile Computing
Overview of mobile applications, technologies and communication. Common paradigms in mobile computing. Application frameworks and application development. Interaction styles for user interface.
Lectures 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P13 (minimum 60 percent) and COSC 3P32 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COSC 3V97.
COSC 3P98
Computer Graphics
Topics include 2-D and 3-D graphics, curve and surface fitting, light and colour models, real time interfaces, animation and hardware issues (knowledge of C assumed).
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent), three COSC credits and MATH 1P12 or permission of the instructor.
COSC 3P99
Computing Project
Half-year development project or directed reading essay under faculty supervision.
Seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET, GAMP and NEUR Neurocomputing stream majors with a minimum 75 percent major average (or permission of project supervisor) and permission of project coordinator.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03.
Note: students may propose their own projects for departmental approval or may apply for a project proposed by a faculty member. Further information (including project guidelines and project list) is available on the department Web pages.
COSC 3Q95
Internship in Game Programming
Internship in a business related to the gaming industry.
Restriction: open to GAMP majors and permission of the Game Program Director.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent) and permission of Game Programming Director.
Note: application required. Enrolment will be limited to the number of placements available. Students will be required to attend orientation meetings, occasional meetings with the Student Support Co-ordinator and develop professional learning objectives. Additional components typically include a site visit, a work term report and an employer performance evaluation.
COSC 3V90-3V99
Computing Topics I
Selected topics in computer science.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET, GAMP and NEUR Neurocomputing stream majors.
COSC 4F90
Computing Project
Full-year project under the supervision of a faculty member.
Seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors with a minimum 75 percent major average, a minimum 10.0 overall credits and permission of project co-ordinator.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent).
Note: students may propose their own projects for departmental approval or may apply for a project proposed by a faculty member. This course is strongly recommended for students considering graduate school. Students must consult with faculty at the end of year 3 regarding supervision of projects. Further information (including project guidelines and project list) is available on the department Web pages.
COSC 4P01
Software Engineering 1
Theory of software engineering. Topics include plan-driven development, Agile development, software requirements elicitation and presentation, verification of software correctness, redundancy, robustness, safety and security. Creation of robust software requirements document. Introduction to tools such as Git and Azure DevOps.
Lectures/seminar/lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB and CAST majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P03 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COSC 4F00.
COSC 4P02
Software Engineering 2
Application of software engineering. The development of a large-scale software engineering project in a competitive team setting, including creation of complete documentation for a working system.
Lecture/Instructor Consultation and Individual work, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB and CAST majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 4P01 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COSC 4F00.
COSC 4P03
Advanced Algorithms
Classical and evolving problems and algorithms in Computer Science. Topics include classical design and analysis techniques, cryptography, combinatorics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P03 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P13
Operating Systems: Design and Implementation
Design and implementation of UNIX and other operating systems. Topics include process and thread management, interprocess communication, synchronization and scheduling, multiprocessing, device drivers, kernel memory management, distributed and advanced file systems and STREAMS (knowledge of C assumed).
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P13 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P14
Computer Networks
Advanced topics in computer networking, including computer network security, wireless and high-speed networking, computer network management and performance evaluation.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 2P13 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P41
Functional Programming
Introduction to functional programming using the languages Haskell and SML. Topics include all data types, type inference, pattern-matching, recursion, polymorphism, higher-order functions, lazy vs eager evaluation, modules and monads.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): three and one-half COSC credits or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P42
Formal Methods in Software Engineering
Specification and correctness of software. Topics include algebraic specifications, semantics of programming languages, Hoare/dynamic logic, specification languages, program transformation.
Lectures/lab/tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): three and one-half COSC credits and MATH 1P67 or permission of the instructor.
*COSC 4P61
Theory of Computation
(also offered as MATH 4P61)
Regular languages and finite state machines: deterministic and non-deterministic machines, Kleene's theorem, the pumping lemma, Myhill-Nerode Theorem and decidable questions. Context-free languages: generation by context-free grammars and acceptance by pushdown automata, pumping lemma, closure properties, decidability. Turing machines: recursively enumerable languages, universal Turing machines, halting problem and other undecidable questions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET, GAMP and NEUR Neurocomputing stream majors.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P67 (minimum 60 percent).
Note: MATH students may take this course with permission of the Mathematics Department.
COSC 4P76
Machine Learning
Fundamental machine learning techniques with emphasis on using these techniques to design and implement small practical learning systems. Topics include learning as a search, inductive bias, concept learning, computational learning, explanation-based learning and reinforcement learning.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P78
Robotics
Computer control aspects of robots focusing on behaviour-based robot control architectures. Topics include robot components and subsystems, sensors and perception, object location and manipulation, mobile robot navigation, task planning, control architectures, adaptive and social behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: PHYS 1P91 and 1P92 are recommended.
COSC 4P80
Artificial Neural Networks
Practical problem solving using artificial neural networks. Supervised learning, single- and multilayer feed-forward networks and backpropagation and refinements; recurrent neural networks; Hopfield networks and Boltzmann machines. Unsupervised learning, competitive learning, Kohonen map and self-organizing feature maps.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P81
AI Programming
Developing computer applications for AI problem solving. Topics in AI software systems, programming languages and paradigms, and their suitability in different problem domains. Languages relevant to AI programming.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 60 percent).
COSC 4P82
Genetic Programming
Synthesis of computer programs using evolutionary computation. Different representations, including tree, linear, grammatical. Theoretical analyses, including the effects of operators, representations and fitness landscapes. Practical applications in problem solving, decision making, classification, computer vision and design.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P83
Reinforcement Learning
Multi-armed bandits, Markov decision processes, model-based and model-free methods (such as dynamic programming, Monte Carlo methods, and temporal-difference methods) for learning value and policy functions. Approximation solutions including deep reinforcement learning.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC, GAME, and Data Science programs.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4P98
Topics in Computer Media and Digital Audio
Fractals, digital audio fundamentals, Fourier analysis, MIDI, computer composition, music and sound processing and user interfaces. Programming assignments may use C, Java, Supercollider and Csound.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): three and one-half COSC credits or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4V77
2020-2021: Probabilistic Graphical Models and Neural Generative Models
Introduction to the theoretical foundations of generative models, applications in prediction, knowledge discovery, creative design. Topics include probabilistic graphical models (PGMs), learning, and inference in traditional PGMs (hidden Markov models, mixture models, and latent Dirichlet allocation). Undirected neural generative models (NGMs), including Markov random fields, and variants of Boltzmann machines. Directed NGMs, including Helmholtz machines and deep belief nets, variational autoencoders, and generative adversarial networks.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
COSC 4V80-4V99
Computing Topics II
Selected topics in computer science.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET, GAMP and NEUR Neurocomputing stream majors.
COSC 4V96
2020-2021: Topics in Computational Intelligence
Current methods in computational intelligence and their practical applications. Emphasis on evolutionary computation, swarm intelligence, artificial immune systems, and neural networks. Applications include optimization, classification, games, swarm robotics, image processing, and network science. New developments in the literature will be surveyed and discussed.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COSC 3P71 (minimum 70 percent) or permission of the instructor.
CO-OP COURSES
COSC 0N01
Co-op Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to COSC and BCB Co-op students.
COSC 0N02
Co-op Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to COSC and BCB Co-op students.
COSC 0N03
Co-op Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to COSC and BCB Co-op students.
COSC 0N04
Co-op Work Placement IV
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to COSC and BCB Co-op students.
COSC 0N05
Co-op Work Placement V
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to COSC and BCB Co-op students.
COSC 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCB, COSC and CNET Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): COSC 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
COSC 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCB and COSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): COSC 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
COSC 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCB and COSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): COSC 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
COSC 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCB and COSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): COSC 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
COSC 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BCB and COSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): COSC 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
INTERNSHIP COURSE
COSC 2N90
Internship
Work placement of 8-16 months duration with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to students accepted into the Internship option.
Note: interviews with employer and student and completion, by the student, of a work report.
Administrative Assistant
Amber Cecchini
905-688-5550, extension 3513
Mackenzie Chown, J314
cosc.brocku.ca
The Department of Computer Science offers four-year programs of study leading to single or combined BSc (Honours), single Computer Science Co-op BSc (Honours), combined Mathematics/Computer Science Co-op BSc (Honours), single BSc with Major in Computer Science and combined BA (Honours) degree program. Two concentrations are available: software engineering and intelligent systems. An Internship program is also available in the honours program. There are cross-disciplinary programs in Computing and Business, Computing and Solid-State Device Technology, Computing and Network Communications, Game Programming, and Interactive Arts and Sciences as well as a Minor in Applied Computing.
See relevant calendar entries for a listing of program requirements.

18

Computing and Business

19

Computing and Network Communications

20

Computing and Solid-State Device Technology

21

Co-operative Programs

22

Critical Criminology
#CRIM 1F90
Introduction to Sociology
(also offered as SOCI 1F90)
Major theoretical paradigms, core concepts and research methodologies. Sociological perspectives on contemporary problems in Canadian, cross-cultural and global contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#CRIM 2F60
Foundations for Community Engagement
(also offered as CANA 2F60 and SOCI 2F60)
Interdisciplinary examination of philosophies, social histories and politics of community service, combined with experiential learning and field trips in community settings, and practices of self-reflection on community engagement.
Lectures, seminar, experiential learning activities, 3 hours per week.
Note: transportation and additional cost is the student's responsibility.
#CRIM 2P00
Foundations in Sociological Thinking
(also offered as SOCI 2P00)
Foundational ideas in social theory, from its classical roots to contemporary branches. Critical thinking and expression.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#CRIM 2P11
Introduction to Research Methods
(also offered as SOCI 2P11)
Research techniques employed by sociologists and the formulation of research designs appropriate to various kinds of intellectual problems in the social sciences, including the relationship between social theory and social research, the logic of research design, fundamental techniques of data collection and ethical issues in social research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
#CRIM 2P20
Sexualities and Society
(also offered as SOCI 2P20 and WGST 2P20)
Topics may include the structuring of sexual identities, sexuality and inequality, legal and social regulation of sexuality, and social justice issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or WGST 1F90.
*CRIM 2P33
Law and Social Justice
(also offered as SOCI 2P33)
Examination of the complex relations between law, inequality and social change. Theoretical approaches to the sociology of law. The role of law in the differential distribution and relations of power along different points of disadvantage.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
#CRIM 2P47
Racialization and Society
(also offered as SOCI 2P47)
Topics may include theoretical, historical and comparative perspectives on the structuring of racial and ethnic identities, ethnic and racial privilege and oppression and anti-racist struggles.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#CRIM 2P51
Sociology of Gender
(also offered as SOCI 2P51 and WGST 2P51)
Sociological approaches to gendered social structures, social relations and identities. Topics may include historical and cross-cultural perspectives on gender, the gendering of social institutions and everyday lives, and struggles for gender equality.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or WGST 1F90.
*CRIM 2P61
Foundations of Critical Criminology
(also offered as SOCI 2P61)
Historical development of major schools of criminology, the development of criminal laws. Topics may include methodological problems in the study of crime, victimization and selected types of criminal activity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
*CRIM 2P62
Sociology of Criminal Justice
(also offered as SOCI 2P62)
Inequality in the creation and enforcement of law in the administration and operation of the Canadian criminal legal system. Critical perspective on the social construction of law, role of courts, problematics of policing and enforcement, crime and criminalization, and issues in punishment and imprisonment.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#CRIM 2P71
Social Class and Social Conflict
(also offered as LABR 2P71 and SOCI 2P71)
Classical and contemporary approaches to the study of social class. Topics may include class relations and class conflict, elites, social mobility, poverty and social marginalization, the Canadian class structure in comparison to other industrialized nations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
#CRIM 2P73
Globalization, Inequality and New World Disorders
(also offered as SOCI 2P73)
Global spread of capitalism, historical origins and perpetuation of underdevelopment, the destruction of traditional societies and environmental impact. Socio-economic structures and political institutions of selected Third World countries and their relation to metropolitan, industrialized power centres.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
CRIM 2P91
Directed Studies I
Topic, readings and methods of evaluation chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Note: students should consult with the Department Administrator prior to enrolment. A written agreement is filed in the Department.
CRIM 2P92
Directed Studies II
Topic, readings and methods of evaluation chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Note: students should consult with the Department Administrator prior to enrolment. A written agreement is filed in the Department.
#CRIM 2P95
Troubling Identities
(also offered as SOCI 2P95)
Sociological perspectives on the processes by which social and personal identities are formed at the nexus between social structural arrangements and everyday lives. Social processes by which these identities may be systematically troubled. Topics may include stigmatization, shaming and marginalization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI 2P52.
CRIM 2V80-2V89
Selected Topics in Critical Criminology
Issues in Critical Criminology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#CRIM 3P00
Introduction to Early Modern Social Theory
(also offered as SOCI 3P00)
Central ideas of the social sciences, their intellectual origin and their change over time. The works of major social philosophers from the 18th and 19th centuries as well as classical sociological theorists.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 2P00.
#CRIM 3P01
Contemporary Social Theory
(also offered as SOCI 3P01)
Major contemporary perspectives of society including functionalist, Marxist, neo-Marxist, cultural, symbolic interactionist, feminist, critical race, post-structural, queer and post-colonial theories. Theoretical origins and development in historical context, their assumptions, conceptual distinctions, methodological features and ethical implications.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 2P00.
#CRIM 3P02
Qualitative Sociological Methods
(also offered as SOCI 3P02)
Selected qualitative methods commonly used in Sociology. Topics may include participant observation, unobtrusive methods, case studies, interviews, focus groups, textual and historical analyses.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 2P11.
#CRIM 3P11
Quantitative Data Analysis I
(also offered as SOCI 3P11)
Introduction to descriptive and inferential statistics. Emphasis on hand computing and statistical computing.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 2P11.
#CRIM 3P12
Quantitative Data Analysis II
(also offered as SOCI 3P12)
Advanced quantitative methods of data analysis focusing on the development and application of technical skills, including data processing, accessing public information systems, multivariate analysis and advanced regression techniques.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 3P11.
#CRIM 3P20
Queer Communities and Popular Culture
(also offered as SOCI 3P20 and WGST 3P20)
Growth of queer communities and their influence on popular print, audio and visual media. Topics include gay, lesbian, bisexual, two-spirited and transgendered (glbtt) influence on contributions to a wide range of culture including film, fashion, sport, theatre and cyberspace.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or WGST 1F90.
*CRIM 3P33
Law and Social Regulation
(also offered as SOCI 3P33)
Legal, administrative and moral regulation of populations perceived as deviant, risky or undesirable and the production of desirable citizens.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61 2P62.
#CRIM 3P45
Sociology of African Canadians
(also offered as SOCI 3P45 and WGST 3P45)
Sociological perspectives and issues in the lives of African Canadians. Topics may include contemporary and historical immigration patterns, slavery, criminal justice, family, gender analysis, racism, sexual identity, labour, the civil rights movement, desegregation, Diasporan debates, and contributions in arts and science. Addresses men's and women's issues equally.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or WGST 1F90.
#CRIM 3P51
Gender and Society
(also offered as SOCI 3P51 and WGST 3P51)
Sociological approaches to gender as an organizing principle in society. Topics may include Canadian and global perspectives on the structuring of masculinities, femininities and other genders, gendered economies, gendered politics, gendered families and gendered popular culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 1F90, WGST 1F90, 2P00.
#CRIM 3P52
Sociology of Eco-terrorism
(also offered as SOCI 3P52)
Topics may include wilderness defence, environmental and animal advocacy, state and legal constructions of 'eco-terrorism' and strategies for resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI 2P94.
*CRIM 3P60
Criminology and the Sociology of Knowledge
(also offered as SOCI 3P60)
Production of knowledge in criminology. Radical perspectives such as anti-criminology, counter-colonialism, feminism, green criminology, abolitionism and social harms. Topics may include the state as primary definer of criminology, critiques of criminology as a moral enterprise and criminologists as knowledge workers and servants of power.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
Note: CRIM 2P61 recommended.
*CRIM 3P61
Sociology of Punishment
(also offered as SOCI 3P61)
Critique of contemporary and historical sociological perspectives and philosophies regarding punishment. Topics may include punishment as a practice and the ideologies that sustain it, the role of authority and bureaucracy, ceremonies of ritual degradation, power and powerlessness, scapegoating, moral panic and revenge.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
*CRIM 3P63
State, Society and Surveillance
(also offered as SOCI 3P63)
Critical exploration of contemporary and historical effects by states, corporations and civil society to produce order and constrain dissent. Topics not limited to governmentality, the police state, corporate and state espionage, policing protest, surveillance technologies and moral regulation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
#CRIM 3P65
Animals and the Law
(also offered as SOCI 3P65)
Overview of the legal status of animals and how this affects their treatment. Topics may include animal rights and animal welfare, anti-cruelty legislation, regulations and standards concerning use of animals in agriculture, biotechnology, entertainment and vivisection.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
*CRIM 3P67
Crime and the Media
(also offered as SOCI 3P67)
Media construction of crime and the implications for criminal justice policies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
*CRIM 3P68
Critical Gang Studies
(also offered as SOCI 3P68)
Street gangs and gang violence in North America. Topics may include theories of gang formation, the social construction of gang problems, the cultural diffusion of gang activities, gang typologies and subculture, and policing gang violence.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
*CRIM 3P69
Critical Perspectives in Indigenous Criminalization
(also offered as INDG 3P69 and SOCI 3P69)
Sociological approaches to Indigenous criminalization. Topics may include imprisonment, gendered violence, state crimes, the policing of protest, and Indigenous law and self-governance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or one INDG (ABST) credit.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3P69.
#CRIM 3P70
Social Justice Research
(also offered as SOCI 3P70)
Exploration of social justice issues through a critical reading of original case studies including theoretical perspective, methodological approach, findings and implications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
#CRIM 3P71
The State and Society
(also offered as SOCI 3P71)
The state as a social, economic, political and ideological institution emphasizing Canada. Topics may include theories of the state (such as Marxist, liberal and feminist); welfare and post-welfare state theory; state power in a global context; and selected case studies of states, public policy and social justice.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or permission of the Department Administrator.
*CRIM 3P74
Youth Culture, Crime and Criminalization
(also offered as SOCI 3P74)
Critical criminology of youth subcultures, crime and criminalization. Topics may include misconduct, scapegoating, moral panics and folk devils, class, gender, race, police in schools, construction of delinquency and neuroscience research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
*CRIM 3P77
Post-Radical Criminological Theories
(also offered as SOCI 3P77)
Sociology of knowledge, historicizing and overview of radical conflict sociological theories of crime and criminalization. Topics include anti-criminology, counter-colonial criminology, critical criminology, globalization criminology, green criminology, left realism, peace-making criminology, social harms and post-structural criminology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
#CRIM 3P80
Environmental Justice
(also offered as SOCI 3P80 and WGST 3P80)
Historical review of relation between environment and human societies from various theoretical perspectives. Inequalities and social justice struggles. Topics may include sustainability, biodiversity, eco-tourism, population, consumerism, environmental management.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or WGST 1F90.
*CRIM 3P82
Gender, Crime and Justice
(also offered as SOCI 3P82 and WGST 3P82)
Feminist criminological theory and selected topics on crime, prisons and the Canadian criminal justice system as they pertain to women. Topics may include women's crime rates, violence by and against women, sex work, drug use, girl gangs, women's prisons, women police officers, women in the security sector, women and terrorism, and Domestic Violence Courts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined), WGST (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS, SOCI and WGST minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 1F90, WGST 1F90, 2P00.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#CRIM 3P86
Indigenous Peoples in Global Perspective
(also offered as INDG 3P86, SOCI 3P86 and WGST 3P86)
Contemporary debates in global Indigenous movements, including the legacy of colonization, land dispossession, cultural appropriation and new developments in the areas of environmental justice, cultural revival and political sovereignty.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 1F90, one INDG (ABST) credit, WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the Department Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI (INDG 3P46) and ABST 3P86.
CRIM 3P90
Directed Studies III
Topic, readings and methods of evaluation chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Note: students should consult with the Department Administrator prior to enrolment. A written agreement is filed in the Department.
CRIM 3P91
Directed Studies IV
Topic, readings and methods of evaluations chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Note: students should consult with the Department Administrator prior to enrolment. A written agreement is filed in the Department.
#CRIM 3P96
Human Migration in a Globalized World
(also offered as SOCI 3P96)
Examination of histories, political economies, social relations and cultural meanings of global human migration. Topics may include voluntary and forced migration, immigration, refugee issues, tourism, borders, securitization, citizenship, diaspora and transnationalism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
*CRIM 3P97
Liberties, Rights and Protections
(also offered as SOCI 3P97)
Theoretical and empirical issues of civil liberties and human rights in criminological perspective. Topics may include criminalization and criminal justice, security, surveillance and control, international crimes, and persecution and protection.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI 2P65 and 3P25.
*CRIM 3P98
Domestic and Intimate Violence
(also offered as CHYS 3P98 and SOCI 3P98)
A critical overview of theories of and legal responses to family and intimate violence, research on these forms of abuse, and the response of police, the courts and other components of the social and legal system.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous grade assigned and credit obtained in SOCI (CHYS) 3P83.
*CRIM 3Q92
Capitalism, the State and Informal Economies
(also offered as SOCI 3Q92)
Contemporary and social history of capitalism, the state, crime and criminalization.Topics may include structuring of market economies, piracy, proxy state actors, organized crime, informal enterprises and states as racketeer organizations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) majors, CRIM, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
#CRIM 3Q96
Critical Issues in Contemporary Society
(also offered as SOCI 3Q96)
Social problems in advanced industrial societies and Canada in particular. Focus on social problems stemming from economic and political crises. Topics may include unemployment, regionalism, ethnic/racial conflict, sovereignty, nationalism, concentrated economic power, and state and market. Proposed strategies of remedial social change.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90 or permission of the Department Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI 3P36.
#CRIM 3Q98
Indigenous Peoples in North America
(also offered as INDG 3Q98, SOCI 3Q98 and WGST 3Q98)
Contemporary struggles for cultural survival, land, self-determination and rights in the context of colonialism in North America. Diversity of Indigenous peoples, including their internal debates and divides.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 CRIM credits above CRIM 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 1F90, one INDG credit, WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the Department Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous grade assigned and credit obtained in SOCI (INDG) 3P46, SOCI (ABST/WGST/WISE) 3P76 and ABST 3Q98.
CRIM 3V10-3V19
Selected Research Topics
Selected methodological issues in Critical Criminology.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
CRIM 3V80-3V99
Selected Topics in Critical Criminology
Selected issues in Critical Criminology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*CRIM 4P01
Service Learning in Community Justice
(also offered as SOCI 4P01)
Application of concepts and theories of conflict resolution and community justice to the practices of organizations such as those involved in prison abolition/reform, mental health, shelters, halfway houses and Indigenous Centres.
Seminar, experiential learning activities, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
Note: transportation and additional costs may be the student's responsibility.
*CRIM 4P03
Collaborative Prison Education
(also offered as SOCI 4P03)
Collaborative study between prisoners and non-prisoners through Walls to Bridges. Program of study links the prison and punishment to sociological issues not limited to capitalism, environmentalism, gender and sexuality, history, race and racism, public education and war and peace.
Seminar, experiential learning activities, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of CRIM 2P33, 2P61, 2P62.
Note: This course will be offered off-site at Grand Valley Institution for Women. Transportation and additional costs may be the student's responsibility. Students are required to submit an application by March 31. For more information contact the Department Administrator.
*CRIM 4P33
Law and Society
(also offered as SOCI 4P33)
Specific relationships between Canada's legal institutions and social structure and institutions; law and Aboriginal peoples, family and gender issues, environment, work and technology, feminist critique of legal theory and practice.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#CRIM 4P51
Gender and Society
(also offered as SOCI 4P51 and WGST 4P51)
Selected issues in gender and society. Topics may include feminist theories, work, family, state, popular culture, race, militarism and violence.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined), and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): two CRIM or WGST credits or permission of the Department Administrator.
Note: CRIM 3P51 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI (WGST) 4F50.
#CRIM 4P53
Masculinities, Culture and Economy
(also offered as LABR 4P53, SOCI 4P53 and WGST 4P53)
Theoretical and empirical issues of the relation between masculinities and cultural and economic processes and structures. May include ethnicity, racialization, sexuality, nationalism, popular culture, leisure, changes in work and the labour market, class formation, and regional identity.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined), LABR (single or combined), and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): two CRIM credits or permission of the Department Administrator.
#CRIM 4P57
Global Racism/Antiracism
(also offered as SOCI 4P57)
Topics may include theorizing of racism, ethnicity and anti-racism in diverse trans/national settings, comparative perspectives on racialized inequalities and anti-racist movements.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Note: CRIM 2P47 recommended.
*CRIM 4P61
Interrogating Criminal Justice
(also offered as SOCI 4P61)
Topics may include critical perspectives on law and social control, feminist perspectives on law and criminology and the politics of law and criminal justice.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
*CRIM 4P62
Social and Moral Regulation
(also offered as SOCI 4P62)
Topics may include critical theoretical perspectives on deviance, moral regulation and the politics of social control.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
#CRIM 4P65
Animals and the Law
(also offered as SOCI 4P65)
Topics may include ideas of justice, animal protection, animal abuse and violence, commodification and property status of animals, legal rights for animals, wildlife trade, endangered species, international laws.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
CRIM 3P65 recommended.
#CRIM 4P67
Racism/Antiracism in Canada
(also offered as SOCI 4P67)
Topics may include Canadian theoretical contributions to the study of racism, ethnicity and anti-racism, racialized inequality in Canada, Canadian anti-racist movements.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
CRIM 2P47 recommended.
#CRIM 4P70
Social Issues in the Community
(also offered as SOCI 4P70)
Organizational responses, resistance strategies, constraints on social action and policy alternatives.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
#CRIM 4P76
Indigenous Social and Political Thought
(also offered as INDG 4P76, SOCI 4P76 and WGST 4P76)
History and contemporary literatures on Indigenous epistemologies, the political philosophy of movements for decolonization, environmental sustainability, and Indigenous writing on gendered justice and cultural resurgence in a globalizing world emphasizing writings by Indigenous scholars.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of two CRIM or SOCI credits, one INDG credit, two WGST credits or permission of the Department Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 4P76.
*CRIM 4P81
Selected issues in Criminology
(also offered as SOCI 4P81)
Comparative sociological perspectives on issues in criminology.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
*CRIM 4P82
Race and the War for Drugs
(also offered as SOCI 4P82)
Topics may include the so-called domestic and international drug war and its relation to classism, racism, sexism and militarization, foreign intervention, banks and money laundering, and the state as a participant in and amplifier of narco-trafficking.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Note: CRIM 2P61 and 2P62 recommended.
*CRIM 4P83
War and non-Violence
(also offered as SOCI 4P83)
Theoretical inquiries into the origins and continuity of warfare, standing armies and non-violence. Topics may include theories of the state, nationalism and patriotism, colonialism and imperialism, gender and sex, religion, race, science and technology, slavery and social movements for peace and non-violence.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (Honours).
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90.
Note: CRIM 2P61 and 2P62 recommended.
#CRIM 4P87
Social Inequality
(also offered as SOCI 4P87)
Advanced study of social inequality and social class in a comparative perspective.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
#CRIM 4P88
Social Problems
(also offered as SOCI 4P88)
Advanced study of social problems using various social research methodologies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
#CRIM 4P89
Controversies in Sociology
(also offered as SOCI 4P89)
Advanced study of controversies in Sociology emphasizing issues in the 21st century. Topics may include racism, gender, social class and sexuality.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
CRIM 4P90
Directed Studies V
Topic, readings and methods of evaluation chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: open to CRIM majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the instructor.
Note: students should consult with the Department Administrator prior to enrolment. A written agreement is filed in the Department.
CRIM 4P91
Directed Studies VI
Topic, readings and methods of evaluation chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: open to CRIM majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the instructor.
Note: students should consult with the Department Administrator prior to enrolment. A written agreement is filed in the Department.
#CRIM 4Q41
Social Policy
(also offered as SOCI 4Q41 and WGST 4Q41)
Canadian and comparative social policy issues, focusing on gender and political economy. Topics may include the sociological political economy of advanced welfare states, welfare state typologies, social and income inequalities in policy formation and delivery, federalism, family policy, and tax policy.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): CRIM 1F90, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
CRIM 4V10-4V19
Selected Research Topics
Selected methodological issues in Critical Criminology.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
CRIM 4V80-4V89
Special Topics in Critical Criminology
Selected issues in Critical Criminology. Course content will vary depending upon the interests of instructors and students.
Restriction: open to CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Administrative Co-ordinators
Jill DeBon, Debbie Ouellette
905-688-5550, extension 3455
Academic South 400A
brocku.ca/sociology
Students with a minimum 70 percent major average in relevant courses may declare an Honours BA in Critical Criminology. This honours program provides students the opportunity for a critical and intensive examination of the contemporary and historical context of groups and interests served by 'law and order' ideaologies, philosophies, policies and practices of social control. This degree offers a distinct orientation to law making, law breaking, law enforcement and social reaction. The curriculum prepares graduating students for graduate level study, college vocational programs and leadership in employment.

23

Digital Humanities

24

Earth Sciences
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
EARTH SCIENCES COURSES
ERSC 1F02
Earth: The Dynamic Planet
Introduction to major Earth science theories and basic geologic principles. Geography and land-based culture of aboriginal peoples in Northern Ontario. Role of both short- and long-term climate changes in the evolution of ecosystems.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
ERSC 1P01
Planet Earth - Solid Earth
Earth as a member of the solar system, minerals, rocks and sediments, plate tectonics, volcanic activity, earthquakes, plate tectonics and the building of continents, economic geology, stratigraphy and geologic time, fossils and the history of life.
Lectures, lab or local field trip, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): any two of 4U/M Biology, 4U/M Chemistry, 4U/MEarth Sciences, 4U/MMathematics or 4U/MPhysics or equivalent.
Note: students may not register concurrently in ERSC 1P92.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ERSC 1F01, 1F90 and 1P92.
ERSC 1P02
Planet Earth - Surface Processes
Glacial geology, geomorphology, Earth surface processes; paleoclimates and future climate change; oceanography; geologic hazards and risk assessment; hydrologic cycle, soil-groundwater contamination, hazardous waste disposal and alternatives.
Lectures, lab or local field trip, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): any two of 4U/M Biology, 4U/M Chemistry, 4U/M Earth Sciences, 4U/M Mathematics or 4U/M Physics or equivalent.
Note: students may not register concurrently in ERSC 1P92.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ERSC 1F01, 1F90 and 1P92.
ERSC 1P92
Extreme Earth
Extreme low frequency events and the geological record of their causes and effects, including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, climatic change and impacts with extraterrestrial bodies.
Note: offered online. Students may not register concurrently in ERSC 1P01 or 1P02. Secondary school sciences are not a prerequisite.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ERSC 1F01, 1F90, 1P01 and 1P02.
ERSC 1P94
Planetary Science
Solar system objects, including the Sun, planets and dwarf planets, named natural satellites (moons) and small solar system bodies; their formation, composition, processes and major characteristics.
Note: offered online.
ERSC 2P03
The History of the Earth
Principles of paleontology, classical stratigraphy, sequence stratigraphy. The origin and evolution of life and the history of the Earth.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01) or (1F90).
*ERSC 2P05
Earth Surface Processes
(also offered as GEOG 2P05)
Earth surface processes and geomorphology within global environments. A dynamic and physically based account of processes and the Earth's surface, linking the fields of sedimentology, physical geography and fluid mechanics.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01) or GEOG 1F91.
#ERSC 2P07
Introduction to Geospatial Technologies
(also offered as GEOG 2P07, IASC 2P07 and TOUR 2P07)
Concepts and applications of geographic information systems (GIS), global positioning systems (GPS) and remote sensing. Properties of digital maps, airborne data and satellite imagery. Principles of map compilation and design. Practical experience in computer mapping, image interpretation and GIS analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
#ERSC 2P08
Climate Crisis
(also offered as GEOG 2P08)
Introduction to the Earth's atmosphere and the natural and anthropogenic drivers that change the Earth's climate system. Greenhouse effect, human activities that alter the climate system, climate models, climates of the past, projections of future climate.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
ERSC 2P15
Introduction to Oceanography
Overview of the oceans, their origin, composition, circulation, geology and biota, from the coastal zone to the abyss. Importance of oceanography to humans, history of oceanography, overview of marine hazards and resources, ocean-atmosphere interactions and the global climate.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of ERSC 1P02 (1F01), (1F90), BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90), GEOG 1F91.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 2P15.
ERSC 2P16
Clastic Sedimentology
Basic clastic sedimentology (grain size, shape, porosity/permeability, fabric) including fundamentals of unidirectional and oscillatory water flows, sediment transport under such flows and resulting sedimentary structures. Clastic rock classification.
Tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Note: offered as a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 2P16.
*ERSC 2P18
Introduction to Plate Tectonics
(also offered as GEOG 2P18)
Topics include plate boundary settings, plate motion, driving forces, earthquakes and volcanic activity and detailed case studies. Labs focus on the analysis of geological maps.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one ERSC credit numbered 1(alpha)00 to 1(alpha)99 or GEOG 1F91.
ERSC 2P23
Mineralogy I: Minerals, Rocks and their Geologic Context
Topics include mineral identification; mineral chemistry; igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary mineral assemblages and textures; and their significance for interpreting geologic context. Labs focus on hand sample techniques for mineral and rock identification and interpretation.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one ERSC credit numbered 1(alpha)00 to 1(alpha)99 or GEOG 1F90; 4U/M Chemistry or CHEM 1P00.
ERSC 2P24
Mineralogy II: Crystallography and Optics
Topics include symmetry, crystal systems, and mineral identification by optical properties. Labs focus on acquiring skills to identify minerals with a petrographic microscope.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P23.
ERSC 2P61
Environmental Geoscience
Natural geological processes and anthropogenic impacts, flooding, landslides, earthquakes, volcanic activity, global warming and climate change. Hydrogeology and human activity, surface and groundwater supply and use, solid waste and hazardous waste disposal. Mineral and energy resources, pollution and alternatives. Professional environmental geosciences practices.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01).
ERSC 3P01
Structural Geology
Measurement and effects of stress and strain. Genesis of brittle and ductile structures and their classification. Methods of structural analysis.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P17 or 2P18.
*ERSC 3P03
Paleontology and Paleobiology
(also offered as BIOL 3P03)
Biodiversity and ecosystems through geologic time, micro and macro evolution in paleobiology and evolutionary biology, large scale environmental change and the fossil record, functional morphology, and phylogenetic and cladistic analysis of the fossil record.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of ERSC 2P03, BIOL 2P05, 2Q04.
#ERSC 3P05
Geographic Information Systems
(also offered as GEOG 3P05 and IASC 3P05)
Principles and use of computer-based systems for capturing, managing, manipulating, analysing and displaying data relating to the Earth's surface emphasizing raster applications. Practical work using ArcGIS.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
#ERSC 3P07
Remote Sensing
(also offered as GEOG 3P07)
Theory and practice of remote sensing. Multispectral, hyperspectral, thermal, radar and laser imaging of the Earth's surface from airborne and spaceborne platforms. Image interpretation and image-analysis techniques.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
#ERSC 3P08
Meteorology
(also offered as GEOG 3P08)
Major concepts, principles and interactions related to the atmospheric-Earth systems, weather analysis and forecasting, natural and anthropogenic factors related to climate change and variability, weather hazards and extreme events, and biophysical feedback effects.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P08 or permission of instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ERSC (GEOG) 2P04.
ERSC 3P11
Chemical and Carbonate Sedimentology
Genesis of Evaporites; petrography and cathodoluminescence of carbonate grains; skeletal structures and chemistry; recent carbonate environments; evolution of carbonate mounds; chemical theory of carbonate grains; textural, structural and chemical limestone diagenesis; dolomitization, silicification and pyritization of carbonate grains.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P17 or 2P18; ERSC 2P21 or 2P23 or permission of the instructor.
ERSC 3P12
Stratigraphy
Fundamentals of lithostratigraphy, biostratigraphy, chronostratigraphy, magnetostratigraphy, geochronology and introduction to the International Stratigraphic Guide, geological time scale, Milankovitch and sub-Milankovitch cyclicity, subsurface geology techniques and correlation, sequence stratigraphy, geological history of southern Ontario.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P03 or 2P16.
#ERSC 3P13
Applied Climatology
(also offered as GEOG 3P13)
Studies in selected topics from the field of energy and moisture exchanges, air pollution, climatic change, climatic impact assessment and bioclimatology. Human impact on the climate along with applied microclimatological investigations and climatic data analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC (2P04), 2P08 or permission of the instructor.
ERSC 3P21
Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology
Igneous rocks: nomenclature and classification; magmatic processes. Application of one, two and three component phase diagrams to interpret the formation of igneous rocks. Metamorphic rocks: types, classification, mineral parageneses. Labs include the study of rocks in thin section, their mineralogy, textures, origin and classification.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P22 or 2P24; CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
*ERSC 3P24
Glacial Geomorphology/Geology
(also offered as GEOG 3P24)
Introduction to glaciology; glacial processes, glacial deposits; their genesis and sedimentology. Relationship of glacial processes to landforms and surface topography. Glacial systems and facies associations. Applied aspects of glacial geology, such as drift exploration.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P05.
*ERSC 3P25
Quaternary Geology
(also offered as GEOG 3P25)
Glaciations in the geological record, causes of glaciations, biotic responses to climatic changes, eustatic and isostatic sea level changes in response to glaciation, Quaternary stratigraphy and correlation of glacial and non-glacial events, application of Quaternary geology to economic and environmental problems, methods of paleoclimatic reconstruction.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P03, 2P16, 3P24 or permission of the instructor.
ERSC 3P31
Geochemistry
Formation of the elements; nucleo-synthesis and cosmic abundances; classification of elements; crystal chemistry, bond energy, crystal defects and elemental partitioning/distribution; kinetic chemistry, elemental diffusion, nucleation and transformation; aqueous geochemistry, water-mineral interactions; Gibbs free energy and the formation/weathering of igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks; introduction to isotope geochemistry.
Lectures, tutorial, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
*ERSC 3P35
Biomonitoring and Environmental Stress Assessment
(also offered as GEOG 3P35)
Use of biodiversity indicators, field methods and passive and active sensors to assess environmental quality. Collection and analysis of quantitative and qualitative data to investigate urban air and water pollution and forest health.
Lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01), (2P09), BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90), GEOG 3P09 (2P09).
Note: field trip(s) in September. Students are expected to pay their expenses.
ERSC 3P59
Experiential Learning in Earth and Environmental Sciences
Discovery, synthesis, sharing of information and self-reflection on career-related field experience in earth and environmental sciences.
Experiential learning.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined) and EVGS (single or combined) majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: orientation meeting in the fall term describes the expectations and guides students in their production of an acceptable experiential learning plan. Admission is conditional on departmental approval of an experiential learning plan (that sets out the learning goals, milestones and the anticipated personal and social benefits of the proposed activity.)
#ERSC 3P83
Geography of Water Resources
(also offered as GEOG 3P83 and TOUR 3P83)
Physical and human factors affecting patterns of use and development of water resources. Emphasis on patterns of supply and demand, approaches to development and management of the resource, problems and alternative strategies.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01), (1F90), GEOG 1F90, 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
*ERSC 3P85
Ecology of a Changing Planet
(also offered as BIOL 3P85 and GEOG 3P85)
Impact of environmental change and human activity on ecosystems. Topics include climate change and global warming, habitat fragmentation, extinction, invasive species, conservation biology and the management of ecological integrity.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of (ERSC 2P09), BIOL 2P05, 2Q04, GEOG 3P09 (2P09).
ERSC 3P90
Volcanology
Survey of volcanoes, their distribution, forms, composition, eruptive products and styles, and potential hazards.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P05; ERSC 2P21 or 2P23; one of CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92), MATH 1P97, MATH/STAT 1P98, one-half PHYS credit numbered 1P21 to 1P93.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3P90.
ERSC 3P91
Groundwater Hydrology
Role of groundwater in the hydrologic cycle, fundamental theory of groundwater flow, its storage and movement, steady and transient flow, and flow net. Equations governing groundwater depth and flow including Darcy's law and Bernoulli's equation. Geologic factors controlling the movement of groundwater. Groundwater extraction and its impact on regional hydrology.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92) and MATH 1P97; PHYS 1P23, 1P93 or permission of the instructor.
*ERSC 3P92
Close-range Photogrammetry: Ground School
(also offered as GEOG 3P92)
History, theory and use of close-range terrestrial and aerial photogrammetry, structure-from-motion point cloud production and analysis of 2D, 3D, 4D models, satellite based positioning systems and survey control including real-time and post-processed-kinematic surveying (RTK, PPK), operation and use of common sensors in Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS), image acquisition, quality control and data processing.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd majors with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
ERSC 3P93
Exploration Geophysics
Underlying physical principles and practical aspects of field acquisition, processing and data interpretation for most common geophysical techniques used in mineral exploration: potential fields, radiometrics, resistivity and electromagnetic methods. Geological interpretation, data integration and applications to specific deposit types.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P18 and 2P23.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ERSC 3V93.
#ERSC 3P95
Advanced Geographic Information Systems
(also offered as GEOG 3P95)
Advanced study of geographic information systems emphasizing the use of several leading edge software for solving complex geospatial questions. Evaluating the extent of human-induced landscape changes. Builds on key concepts from GEOG 3P05 including data acquisition techniques (e.g. GPS, unmanned aviation), data management, georeferencing, geoprocessing, spatial modelling and statistics, and cartography.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to ERSC (single, combined or general studies), GEOG (single, combined or general studies), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (intermediate/Senior) majors, GHUM, SOSC students, ERSC and GEOG minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P05.
ERSC 3P96
Special Topics in Earth Sciences I
Selected issues and various methods of inquiry related to faculty expertise.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
ERSC 3P97
Special Topics in Earth Sciences II
Selected issues and various methods of inquiry related to faculty expertise.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
ERSC 3P99
Field Camp-Solid Earth
Two-week immersion course offered after final examinations in year 3 introducing students to collecting, recording and synthesizing field data, airphoto mapping, preparing geologic maps and reports. Field area, situated in northern Ontario, consists of Archaean, Proterozoic and Paleozoic lithologies.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P01.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*ERSC 3Q99
Field School-Quaternary Geology
(also offered as GEOG 3Q99)
Field and laboratory methods for analysis of Quaternary landscapes based on field sites including fluvial, hillslope, coastal, glacial, and biosphere examples.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P17 or 2P18.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
ERSC 3V90-3V95
Selected Topics in Earth Sciences
Selected issues in Earth sciences.
ERSC 4F91
Thesis
Research on geological problems involving field or laboratory study under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to ERSC (Honours) (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and a minimum 75 percent major average.
Note: submission and oral examination of thesis are required.
ERSC 4P01
Advanced Structural Geology
Exploration of topics relevant to structural geology through the study of the scientific literature. Topics may vary.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P01.
#ERSC 4P07
Advanced Remote Sensing
(also offered as GEOG 4P07)
Theory and practice of in situ, airborne and spaceborne remote sensing. Emphasis on techniques used to study natural and human-made environments. Topics include data acquisition and preprocessing, image analysis, accuracy assessment and the production of information products. Image processing and analyses using commercially available image-analysis software.
Lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined),GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P07 or permission of the instructor.
ERSC 4P10
Advanced Clastic Sedimentology
Team study of the subsurface geology of a selected area of a Lake Erie gas field. Drill cores and geophysical logs are used to correlate lithostratigraphic units and to construct structure contour maps and isopach maps of gas-bearing strata. Introduction to sedimentary facies models.
Lab, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P16 and 3P12.
ERSC 4P11
Sedimentary Facies Models
Depositional environments of clastic sediment in marine and non-marine settings and geological criteriafor recognizing their deposits.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P16 and 3P12.
ERSC 4P13
Advanced Geochemistry
Lithogeochemistry and spectroscopy, analytical methods in geochemistry, analysis and interpretation of stable and radioactive isotopes, aqueous geochemistry including equilibrium in real fluids, carbonate and silica equilibria, redox, metal solubility, geothermal, and fluid inclusions.
Lectures, lab, local field trips, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P31.
ERSC 4P16
Precambrian Geology
Archaean and Proterozoic evolution of the Earth examining: geology, tectonics, stratigraphy and history of the Precambrian; evolution of the Earth's crust; Precambrian time scale; evolution of life, oceans and atmosphere.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P21.
*ERSC 4P18
Paleobotany and Palynology
(also offered as BIOL 4P18)
Fossil record of the green lineage: chlorophytes, charophytes and embryophytes. Evolution of the clade Viridiplantae. Record of terrestrialization and of plant interactions with fungi and animals. Reconstruction of paleoenvironments and paleoclimates from paleobotanical evidence.
Lectures, lab, field trips, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 2P03 or BIOL 2P93.
Note: ERSC 3P03 recommended.
ERSC 4P21
Advanced Igneous Petrology
Igneous petrogenesis, emphasizing the physical chemistry of igneous processes, igneous rock complexes and studies of a number of petrologically important areas.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P21.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ERSC 3P94.
#ERSC 4P26
Stream Form and Function
(also offered as BIOL 4P26 and GEOG 4P26)
Exploration of the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of stream systems.
Seminar, lab, field work, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of (ERSC 2P09), BIOL 2P05, 2Q04, GEOG 3P09 (2P09) or permission of the instructor.
*ERSC 4P28
Advanced Glacial Sedimentology
(also offered as GEOG 4P28)
Sedimentology of present day glacial environments and of Quaternary sediments. Thermo-mechanical principles of glacier physics as applied to past and present glacier ice conditions. Glacial lithofacies associations. Glacio-tectonics and diagenesis. Principles of glacial erosion, entrainment and deposition.
Lectures, lab, local field trip, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P24 or 3P26.
ERSC 4P31
Watershed Study and Assessment
Hydrologic/watershed cycle; fundamentals and principles of watersheds-interaction of hydrosphere-lithosphere-biosphere; physical characteristics, effects and controls of stream sediments/contaminants/pollutants; aqueous geochemistry; introduction to watershed toxicology. Investigation of concerns with several watersheds. Major study and report of a local subwatershed.
Lectures, lab, local field work, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Note: students must supply their own safety equipment (safety glasses and lab coats).
ERSC 4P46
Advanced Environmental Issues
Waste audit of select sites and localities; energy audit - electricity consumption of select sites and localities; examination of environmental issues at the municipal, national, and international levels; examination of global warming and climate change with respect to anthropogenic and natural forcings. Evaluation of solutions and alternatives to pollution/contamination (carbon dioxide, methane).
Lab, tutorial, local field work, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ERSC 4P45.
ERSC 4P47
Late Cenozoic Dinoflagellate Cysts
Biology and ecology of modern cyst-producing dinoflagellates, and the record of dinoflagellate cysts through the late Cenozoic including their morphology, taxonomy, paleoecology, biostratigraphy, molecular phylogeny and evolution. Topics include marine paleoenvironmental reconstruction, paleoceanography, paleoclimatology and oil industry applications.
Lectures, lab, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P03 or permission of the instructor.
ERSC 4P50
Petroleum Geology
Hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation, including physical and chemical properties of petroleum, methods of exploration, the subsurface environment, generation and migration of petroleum, reservoirs, traps and seals, sedimentary basins and petroleum systems, emphasizing Canada, nonconventional petroleum resources, and the economics and geopolitics of petroleum.
Lectures, lab, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P12 (3P10).
ERSC 4P61
Surface Hydrology
Distribution and variation of run-off, recurrence of floods and droughts; fluvial processes and sediment transport; limnology and paleolimnology; hydrologic and water management techniques; surface and groundwater interaction.
Lectures, lab, local field trip, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P25 or 3P91.
#ERSC 4P80
Dendrochronology
(also offered as BIOL 4P80 and GEOG 4P80)
Fundamental principles of tree-ring analysis and applications to address contemporary issues in the fields of climate and environmental change, geomorphology, archaeology, and ecology.
Lectures, local field trip, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of (ERSC 2P09), BIOL 2Q04, GEOG 3P09 (2P09) or permission of the instructor.
Note: BIOL majors must take BIOL 2Q04; BIOL 2P93 or 2P94 is strongly recommended.
*ERSC 4P85
Ecosystems and Changing Disturbance Regimes
(also offered as BIOL 4P85 and GEOG 4P85)
Terrestrial ecosystem response to large-scale environmental change. Topics may include disturbance regimes, adaptation, alteration of biogeochemical cycles, invasive species and range shifts, carbon cycle feedbacks, predicting future climate and vegetation impacts, change detection, scaling-up and nonlinearity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
*ERSC 4P92
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems: Practicum
(also offered as GEOG 4P92)
Introduction to the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) for data acquisition. Aviation safety, risk management, mission planning and execution. Culminating exercise involving UAS flight operation, map production and data analysis.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P92.
Note: possession of valid Transport Canada Pilot Certificate - Basic or Advanced Operations is required. A field activity and RPAS user fee will be assessed. Overnight off campus travel may be required. An orientation session will be held prior to registration.
ERSC 4P94
Ore Geology and Associated Geophysical Techniques
Classification, genesis and exploration for different metallic and industrial mineral deposits, with emphasis on application and expected geophysical signature of different ores on a variety of environments.
Lectures, lab, 5 hrs per week.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC 3P93 and ERSC 3P01.
CO-OP COURSES
ERSC 0N01
Work Placement I
First Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ERSC Co-op students.
ERSC 0N02
Work Placement II
Second Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ERSC Co-op students.
ERSC 0N03
Work Placement III
Third Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ERSC Co-op students.
ERSC 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ERSC Co-op students.
ERSC 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ERSC Co-op students.
ERSC 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic students through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to EVGS and ERSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ERSC 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ERSC 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to EVGS and ERSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ERSC 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ERSC 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to EVGS and ERSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ERSC 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ERSC 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to EVGS and ERSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ERSC 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
ERSC 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to EVGS and ERSC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ERSC 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistant
Caroline Romero
905-688-5550, extension 3526
Mackenzie Chown D431
brocku.ca/earthsciences
The field of Earth sciences is central in solving current problems such as waste disposal, pollution, groundwater management, volcano and earthquake hazards. It is also vital in the exploration and utilization of natural resources such as oil and gas, minerals and aggregates. A very important area of research in the Earth sciences aims to determine how the planet has evolved from its origin 4.6 billion years ago to the present. Earth's rocks and sediment provide a long record of global change in response to a variety of stimuli. Many Earth scientists are involved in the unravelling of this record of global change and in predicting future changes to the planet.
The Department of Earth Sciences offers programs dedicated to graduating high-quality geoscientists proceeding toward registration as a Professional Geoscientist (PGeo). The Department offers other options for those interested in Earth Sciences, but not intending to become Professional Geoscientists.
The Department of Earth Sciences offers four-year programs of study leading to a BSc Honours in Earth Sciences, BSc Honours in Environmental Geoscience, a BSc with Major in Earth Sciences, a BSc with Major in Environmental Geoscience and a BSc Pass degree program. In addition, five-year Co-op programs leading to a BSc Honours degree in Earth Sciences or Environmental Geoscience are available.
The four-year BSc Honours and BSc with Major programs consist of a set of core courses in year 1, year 2 and part of year 3. During year 3, students choose from elective courses to specialize in a curriculum reflecting their personal interests. Students normally enter directly into the BSc Honours program and are required to maintain at least second-class honours standing. Students not meeting this requirement may continue in one of the BSc with Major programs.
The requirement for graduation with an Earth Sciences (Honours) degree is a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average.
The requirements for a BSc with Major and a BSc (pass) are a minimum 60 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent overall average.
The Department has teaching and research laboratories which include such facilities as recirculating sediment flume, dendrochronology laboratory, glacial micromorphology laboratory, palynological laboratories, vitrinite reflectance workstation, cathodoluminescence microscopic analysis, atomic absorption spectrometry, petrographic image analysis equipment, digitizer, water quality analysis equipment, fluorometric analysis and stable isotope preparation. These are supported by rock specimen preparation and drafting facilities, a cold room, core storage facilities and Departmental collections. Departmental as well as University computing facilities are available. SEM and ICPMS facilities are also available within the Faculty of Mathematics and Science. The Department shares the facilities of electronic, machine and glass blowing shops with other departments.

25

Economics
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ECONOMICS COURSES
ECON 1P91
Principles of Microeconomics
Introduction to microeconomics. Topics include nature of economics, price system, demand, production and cost, markets and pricing, factor pricing and distribution of income.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Note: may be taken concurrently with, before or after ECON 1P92.  May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 1P92
Principles of Macroeconomics
Introduction to macroeconomics. Topics include nature of economics, determination and control of national income, money, banking and monetary policy, macroeconomic policy and balance of payments.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Note: may be taken concurrently with, before or after ECON 1P91.  May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 1P94
Introductory Mathematics for Economics
Introduction to the application and techniques of mathematics in economics and business. Topics include linear and non-linear functions, systems of equations, limits, differentiation, curvature, optimization, marginal analysis, comparative statics, integration, growth, geometric and power series and an introduction to computer algebra systems using examples from Economics.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to MATH (single or combined) majors.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Students will not receive earned credit in ECON 1P94 if MATH 1P97 has been successfully completed.
ECON 1P95
Using Big Data to Solve Economic and Social Problems
Analyzing and providing solutions to current social and economic problems using statistical and data analysis techniques such as regression, quasi-experimental methods, and machine learning. Topics include income and social mobility, equality of opportunity, education, innovation and entrepreneurship, health care, judicial decisions, and climate change.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P10
United States Economic History
United States economic development from the colonial era to the late 20th century. Topics include the effect of British mercantilist policy on the colonial economy, westward expansion, financial development under central and free banking, comparison of Northern and Southern agriculture, slavery and emancipation, industrialization and industrial organization, transportation, impact of wars, the changing role of women and the interaction of government and market.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 2P10.
ECON 2P11
European Economic History
The pre-industrial economy of the Middle Ages, the commercial expansion of Europe in the 16th century, the 17th century depression and the Industrial and Agricultural revolutions of the late 18th and 19th centuries. Technical progress, capital accumulation, growth of demand and new forms of economic organization as sources of economic change. The spread of industrialization between countries, the role of Europe in the world economy and the changing economic role of the state.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 2P11.
*ECON 2P15
The Economics of Unions
(also offered as LABR 2P15)
Labour unions in the marketplace. How unions affect, and are affected by, the labour and product markets. Topics include the effects of unions on wages, fringe benefits, turnover, inequality, productivity and the profitability of firms; union behaviour; who belongs to unions and why; collective bargaining; strikes; interest arbitration; public-sector unionism.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P17
Economic Development
The economic factors affecting the growth of developing countries. Topics include growth models, inequality and poverty, education, urbanization, agriculture, international trade and the historical emergence of today's underdeveloped nations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P19
Canadian Economic History
Growth and change in the Canadian economy, from earliest European contact to the 20th century. Theories of growth, and of technical, institutional and demographic change. Topics include early fish, fur and timber trades, agriculture, the development of the West and the National Policy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 2P19.
ECON 2P21
Intermediate Microeconomics I
Topics include the theory of the consumer and producer, willingness to pay, index numbers, the structure of a perfectly competitive industry and an introduction to imperfectly competitive markets. Applications are emphasized.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91; one of ECON 1P94, MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ECON 2P23.
ECON 2P22
Intermediate Macroeconomics I
Main determinants of aggregate output and national income in an open economy. Topics include money and interest, effects of fiscal and monetary policies, and trade and capital flows under different exchange rate regimes. Extension of the macroeconomic model to include the price level. Study of aggregate demand and aggregate supply.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P92.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P23
Managerial Economics
Application of microeconomic concepts to business decision making. Topics include sales taxes and subsidies, consumer theory, production theory and various market structures such as discriminating monopoly, oligopoly and dominant firms.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE and INPE majors.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91; one of ECON 1P94, MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97.
Note: this course is primarily designed for students in the Business Administration program. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ECON 2P21.
ECON 2P25
Economics of Education
Introduction to theoretical and empirical analysis of education. Topics may include basic theory of investments in education (human capital theory); the signaling versus human capital debate; returns to education; early childhood education effects on cognitive, non-cognitive, and labour market outcomes; teacher labour markets; on-line education; and effects of class sizes and teachers qualifications and experience.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*ECON 2P28
Economics of the Environment
(also offered as TOUR 2P28)
Economic perspectives on environmental and natural resource issues. Topics may include valuing environment improvements, population growth issues, sustainable development, forestry and fishery management, ozone depletion and climate change.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to TMGT and TREN majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P28.
ECON 2P29
Sustainable Development
Aspects of sustainable development. Topics may include energy, transportation and climate, water availability, trade and globalization, agriculture and food availability, boundary and governance issues, cities and population growth, and resource depletion.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P30
Foundations of Economic Analysis
Topics may include propositional logic, proofs, elementary set theory, sets in Euclidean space and univariate functions.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to MATH (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91, 1P92 and MATH/STAT 1P98; one of ECON 1P94, MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Students will not receive earned credit in ECON 2P30 if ECON 3P91 has been successfully completed.
ECON 2P32
Economics of Violence
Economic causes and consequences of violent conflict, from large-scale violence (war, revolution) to conflict between individuals (civil disobedience, domestic abuse). Economic principles and real-world evidence to analyze fundamental questions such as "How can we prevent violence?"
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P34
Economics of Illicit Drugs
Economic analysis of illicit drugs, Including effects on demand, supply, prices and other market outcomes. Market structure, drug pricing, and price discrimination in comparison to the legal drug market. Public policy issues such as legalization, costs of addiction, enforcement and punishment.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P42
Economics of Professional Sport
Economics of professional sport industries. Topics include the cost and market structures of professional sport, government subsidies for stadiums and arenas, team objectives, competitive balance and revenue sharing, player salaries and labour markets, and introduction to sports analytics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P46
Economics of China
Economic development of the Peoples Republic of China, emphasizing the recent reform period (1980s to the present). Topics mayinclude Chinas economic structure, institutions, standards of living, income distribution, foreign trade and investment, stateversus private ownership, urban and rural reforms, and population policies.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P54
Canadian Economic Issues
Canadian economic and business problems and policies. Topics may include stabilization, competition, taxation, foreign trade and exchange rate policies.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*ECON 2P65
Health Economics
(also offered as HLSC 2P65)
Basic economic theory as it applies to health. Examination of international public health issues. Topics may include cost-benefit analysis, insurance, infectious and non-infectious disease, pharmaceutical industry, addictive substances, Aboriginal health, poverty and homelessness, and the future of Canada's healthcare system.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2P90
Introduction to Econometrics
Probability, random variables and density functions; correlation analysis; estimation and hypothesis testing in the classical linear regression model. Practical applications to different areas of economics and business.
Lectures, lab, 4.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to MATH (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92; MATH/STAT 1F92 or 1P98.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ECON 2P91.
ECON 2P91
Business Econometrics with Applications
Multiple regression analysis with applications to forecasting and business decisions.
Lectures, lab, 4.5 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE and INPE majors.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91, 1P92, MATH 1P97 and MATH/STAT 1P98.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ECON 2P90.
ECON 2V60-2V69
Topics in Canadian Economic Policy
Study of a particular area or theme in Canadian economic policy.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P01
History of Economic Thought I
Development of economic analysis to 1870, including mercantilism, the classical school of political economy and Marx.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P02
History of Economic Thought II
The development of economic analysis since 1870, including marginalism, Keynes and the founders of modern economies.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P92; ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: ECON 3P01 is recommended. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P03
Money and Banking I
Overview of financial markets, understanding interest rates, portfolio choice, the capital asset pricing model, the behaviour, risk and term structure of interest rates. Economic analysis of banking structure, the banking firm and the management of financial institutions. The stock market, portfolio choice, the capital asset pricing model.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 2P22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P04
Money and Banking II
Central banking, the conduct and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. The foreign currency market. The demand and supply of money. Money and inflation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 2P22.
Note: ECON 3P03 is recommended. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P06
Industrial Organization
Markets and the economic environment affecting strategic pricing and non-pricing behaviour of firms. Topics include the determinants of market structure, oligopoly pricing including game theory, predatory pricing, resale price maintenance, limit pricing, price fixing, advertising and research and development.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P10
Research Methods in Economics
Locating economic data and published research, planning the project and defining a hypothesis, reasoning and argument in economics, uses and abuses of theory and quantitative methods, selection of appropriate methods, presentation of the findings.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE and INPE majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 2P22; ECON 2P90 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P13
Economics of the Multinational Enterprise
Economic theory of and public policy towards the multinational enterprise. Topics include theories of foreign direct investment, macroeconomic and microeconomic effects of direct investment in host countries, home country issues, industry studies, public policy towards multinationals.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P14
Public Sector Economics: Expenditure
The role and nature of the government sector; economics of public expenditure with reference to equity and efficiency considerations; techniques of public expenditure analysis; intergovernmental fiscal relations and economics of public debt.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P15
Public Finance: Taxation
Economic analysis of public policy issues relating to the taxing and financing activities of government. Topics may include personal income and business income taxation, income and wealth inequality, social insurance, and the theory of optimal taxation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P18
Urban Economics
Theories of location, city formation and urban spatial structure. Topics include housing, transportation, poverty, financing of municipal governments and the economics of city size. Social welfare implications of problems and policies.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P21
Intermediate Microeconomics II
Topics may include models of market structure such as monopoly, duopoly, oligopoly and monopolistic competition; demand and supply of factors of production under perfect and imperfect markets. Introduction to the general equilibrium model and welfare theory emphasizing applications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P22
Intermediate Macroeconomics II
Topics include economic growth theory, money demand and supply, inflation, unemployment, and the effectiveness of monetary and fiscal policy in an open economy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 2P22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*ECON 3P24
Labour Economics
(also offered as LABR 3P24)
Economics of the labour market. Topics include the demand for labour, the supply of labour and investment in human capital. Policy applications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*ECON 3P25
Topics in Labour Economics
(also offered as LABR 3P25)
Topics vary from year to year and may include unemployment and the impact of unemployment insurance in the labour market, discrimination in the labour market, labour migration and the economic impact of immigration, economics of the family, the distribution of income and wealth in Canada, the economic impact of unions on wages and non-wage outcomes, issues in retirement and pensions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P27
Economics of Natural Resources
Economic analysis of the extraction of non-renewable resources (such as oil or minerals) and the harvest of renewable resources (such as water, fish or forests). Development of socially optimal extraction or harvesting rules. Examination of recent government resource policies.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P28
Environmental Economics
Economic analysis of environmental degradation. The theory of externalities applied to environmental policy design for air, water, soil and toxic pollutants. International and distributional impacts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P29
Energy Economics
Operation of the energy industry in North America and globally. Economics of exploration, development, production, marketing and transportation of energy. Demand for energy. Impact of government regulations and deregulation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P60
Directed Studies in Economics
Topics not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the directed studies prior to registration. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
#ECON 3P73
Game Theory
(also offered as MATH 3P73)
Representation of Games. Strategies and payoff functions. Static and dynamic games of complete or incomplete information. Equilibria concepts: Nash, Bayesian Nash and Perfect Bayesian Nash equilibria. Convexity concepts, fixed points for correspondences and minimax. Core and Shapley value of a game. Refinements and Applications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of ECON 3P91, 3Q91, MATH 2P91 (2P72).
ECON 3P90
Econometrics
Estimation and application of the multiple regression model in applied economic context. Generalized Least Squares estimation in the presence of heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. Estimation with limited dependent variables. Non-linear regression models and the method of maximum likelihood. Introduction to qualitative response models such as Logit and Probit. Introduction to different types of economic data.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 2P22; one of ECON 2P90, 2P91, MATH/STAT 2P81 and 2P82; one of ECON 1P94, MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P91
Mathematical Economics
Quantitative techniques used in economic theory and business problems. Topics may include sets and relations, matrix algebra, differential calculus, multivariate optimization without constraints and constrained optimization.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to MATH (single, combined or general studies) majors.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 2P22; one of ECON 1P94, MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P92
Forecasting Using Time Series Data
Forecasting methods used in business and economics. Includes time series graphics, data transformations and adjustments, simple forecasting methods, time series decomposition, exponential smoothing, time series regression models, residual diagnostics, forecast evaluation and prediction intervals.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P90 or 2P91.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ECON 4P12.
ECON 3P93
International Trade
The pure theory of international trade and commercial policy. Topics include the gains from trade, specialization, determinants of trade flows and impacts of tariffs and quotas.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 3P21.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P94
International Payments
Adjustment in the balance of payments and the role of international monetary institutions. International capital flows, interest rate arbitrage and exchange rates. International asset portfolio diversification.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 3P22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3P97
Cost-Benefit Analysis
Analysis of welfare economics and its application to project evaluation. Emphasis on measurement of non-market activities such as benefits from environmental improvements and valuation of unemployed resources.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 3P21.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3Q90
Computational Economics
Introduction to modern computer-based numerical methods for the analysis of economic models. Discussion of problems not readily solved using standard analytics. Computational techniques, with actual applications providing experience as alternatives. Topics include numerical equation solving, function evaluation, root finding, optimization or simulation of games, dynamic general equilibrium, models with uncertainty.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 or 3P91; ECON 3P21.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3Q91
Mathematical Methods in Economics
Topics may include relations, cardinality, vectors and matrices, and multivariate functions including unconstrained and constrained optimization.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to MATH (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; ECON 2P22 and 2P30.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3Q96
Financial Econometrics
Statistical and mathematical methods commonly used in the empirical analysis of financial markets. Emphasis on univariate and multivariate modelling and forecasting for public equities, debt, and derivatives markets, as well as the quantitative management of financial risks.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23; one of ECON 2P90 (minimum 75 percent), 2P91 (minimum 75 percent), MATH/STAT 2P81 and 2P82; one of ECON 1P94 (minimum 75 percent), MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3Q97
Economics of Population Aging
Dynamics of population models, demographic transition, and determinants of population aging examined through labour market outcomes such as workforce demographics, employment, and wages;  the macroeconomic effects on capital, consumption, savings, and economic growth; and the implications for government spending, taxation, social security, and publicly supplied health care.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 3P21 or 3P22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 3V60-3V69
Field Courses in Economics
Application of economic analysis to special topics.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4F10
Applied Economics Honours Seminar
Advanced research methods in economics including research design, inference and argument, and issues in economic methodology. Applied econometric modeling to capture and explain the stylized facts of aggregate variables (macro analysis), decision making behaviour (micro analysis) and policy analysis.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE and INPE majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 3P10 (minimum 70 percent), 3P21, 3P22 and 3P90 (minimum 70 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4F90
Honours Essay
Program of reading and research under the supervision of a Faculty member.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: for more information students should consult the ECON 4F90 co-ordinator. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P05
Empirical Methods: Time Series
Empirical methods for the study of time series data. Topics may include the analysis of stationary and nonstationary data, tests of unit roots, ARIMA modelling, cointegration, dynamic regression models, vector autoregressions and advanced forecasting methods.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 or 3P91; ECON 3P90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P06
Empirical Methods: Microeconometrics
Builds a theoretical distinction between correlation and causation, and introduces regression-based methodologies used to identify causal relationships. Topics may include omitted variable bias and average treatment effects, fixed effects, instrumental variables, differences in differences, and regression discontinuity design applied to economic and public policy questions from the fields of labour, development and public economics.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until data specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 or 3P91; ECON 3P90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Not open to students with credit in ECON 3P95 taken in 2017-2018 Fall/Winter and 2018-2019 Fall/Winter.
ECON 4P07
Empirical Methods: Machine Learning in Economics and Business
Introduction to "modern" statistical learning and predictive modeling from statistical, theoretical, and computational perspectives; with applications. Topics may include linear and local (neighbour-based) regression methods, logistic regression and discriminant analysis methods of classification, cross validation and bootstrap resampling methods, model selection and regularization, classification trees, and support vector machines.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 or 3P91; ECON 3P90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P13
Advanced Macroeconomics
Advanced macro theory supplemented with readings and discussions of recent literature.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P22 (minimum 70 percent), 3P22 (minimum 70 percent), 3P90 (minimum 70 percent) and 3Q91 (minimum 70 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P14
Advanced Microeconomics
Advanced micro theory. Topics may include theory of consumer behaviour, theory of the firm, imperfect competition, general equilibrium and welfare economics, behaviour under uncertainty, risk and asymmetric information.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE, INPE majors and ECON minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23 (minimum 70 percent); ECON 3P21 (minimum 70 percent) and 3Q91 (minimum 70 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P16
International Money and Finance
Monetary approach to the balance of payments and exchange rate determination under rational expectations and other expectations regimes. Economic shocks, exchange rate volatility and efficiency of exchange rate markets. Capital flows and optimal currency areas.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 or 3P91; ECON 3P21 and 3P22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P17
Economic Growth
Classical and modern theories of economic growth and their empirical applications. Roles of population growth, education, human capital, investment and technological change on economic growth. Endogenous growth models and persistence of economic inequality across countries.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 or 3P91; ECON 3P21 and 3P22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P26
Monetary Economics
Advanced treatment of money demand including both theory and econometrics. Relationships between money and inflation, and money and economic growth. Rational expectations, efficient capital markets and monetary policy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 or 3P91; ECON 3P21 and 3P22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P34
Games, Information and Uncertainty in Economics
Analysis of strategy under varying information structures amongst rational agents. Applications may include business competition, education, conflict, contests, auctions, contracts and labour markets.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P30 and 3P21.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 4P60
Directed Research in Economics
Guided research and writing on topics not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to ECON (single or combined), ECAN, BBE and INPE majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: students will be required to submit a major research paper. Topics must be chosen in consultation with the faculty member(s) willing to supervise the directed research prior to registration. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
CO-OP COURSES
ECON 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ECAN, ECON and BBE Co-op students.
ECON 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ECAN, ECON and BBE Co-op students.
ECON 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ECAN, ECON and BBE Co-op students.
ECON 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ECAN, ECON and BBE Co-op students.
ECON 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to ECAN, ECON and BBE Co-op students.
ECON 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentations, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECON and BBE Co-op students.
ECON 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBE, ECAN and ECON Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ECON 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBE, ECAN and ECON Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ECON 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBE, ECAN and ECON Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ECON 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBE, ECAN and ECON Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ECON 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ECON 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to BBE, ECAN and ECON C-op students.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 0N90.
Corequisite(s): ECON 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
Administrative Assistant
Kim Hill
905-688-5550, extension 4697
Plaza 451
brocku.ca/economics
Economics is divided into two parts: Microeconomics and Macroeconomics. Microeconomics focuses on the operation of the market system under alternative scenarios about competition. It studies the economic decisions of individuals, households and firms and shows how those decisions interact to produce market outcomes. Microeconomics then examines the efficiency of the market outcomes and the extent to which they benefit society. Macroeconomics examines the functioning of the broader economy and some of its key sectors. Its main focus is on economic performance as measured by employment, unemployment, and the gap between aggregate economic activity and its potential. Through this analysis, macroeconomics identifies factors that help an economy achieve sustained increases in its standard of living. Macroeconomics also pays special attention to monetary phenomena, inflation, interest rates, and the exchange rate.
The analytical tools developed in micro and macro economics are applied to many different subject areas within economics such as industrial organization, labour economics, international trade, economic development, taxation, and government expenditure. Other fields, such as money and banking and international payments, apply economic tools to the study of financial markets. The analyses yield insights and predictions that are used to develop public policy on a wide range of issues.
The Economics (Honours) program provides a rigorous examination of economics. It prepares students for positions in all sectors of the economy and it is the recommended program for students considering graduate studies in economics. The Bachelor of Arts (BA) with Major Economics program also provides an in-depth study of economics, but it allows for more choice and breadth since it does not require some of the more technical senior level Economics courses. The pass Economics program covers the core topics in economics and allows students to complete a BA after completing only 15 credits.

26

Education - Aboriginal Adult Education
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ABED 2F01
Aboriginal Approaches to Philosophy, Spirituality and Ethics
Traditional Indigenous philosophies, spirituality and ethics, ceremonies, protocols and systems of knowledge in Canada.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
ABED 2F02
Indigenous Environmental Knowledge
Healing for Aboriginal adult learners and educators using the physical environment as a source of Indigenous ways of knowing the land. Connections to the land through creation stories, land-based learning and reciprocal relationships.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
ABED 3F01
Indigenous Philosophies in Education
Indigenous philosophies and traditions underlying how Indigenous peoples teach and learn. Issues specific to the local Indigenous traditions.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
ABED 3F02
Indigenous Approaches to Respecting the Land
Relationship of Indigenous adult learners and educators to the land using the physical environment as a pathway towards traditional Indigenous environmental practices. Strategies for teaching about the respect, conservation and relationship from an Indigenous perspective.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
ABED 3F30
Indigenous Research Methodologies
Theoretical and practical approaches of mainstream and traditional Indigenous research methodologies. Methodologies that respect Indigenous cultures and communities.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
ABED 3F40
Decolonizing and Anti-Racism in Education
Impact of colonization on the lives of Indigenous peoples in Canada focusing on educational issues such as the residential schools. Strategies for decolonizing education.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
ABED 4F14
Introduction to Aboriginal Education
Introduction to Aboriginal ways of learning and constructing knowledge and the relationships between culture/education and learning/healing.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Bachelor of Education Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F84.
ABED 4F15
Aboriginal Curriculum Theory and Design
Introduction to an Aboriginal approach to creating curriculum through a community-based developmental model. Topics include decolonization, relationship between learning and healing, learning outcome development and global Indigenous trends in education.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Bachelor of Education Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Prerequisite(s): ABED 4F14 (ABED 4F84).
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F85.
ABED 4F16
Aboriginal Ways of Teaching and Learning
Issues in Aboriginal and mainstream adult education including learning styles, evaluation, storytelling, experiential learning and lesson planning.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Bachelor of Education Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Prerequisite(s): ABED 4F15 (4F85).
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F86.
ABED 4F17
Aboriginal Leadership Issues
Relationship between the colonial experience and contemporary Aboriginal leadership; contemporary policy-making processes and the wider role of the Aboriginal trainer/teacher in our communities.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Bachelor of Education Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Prerequisite(s): ABED 4F16 (4F86).
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F87.
ABED 4F18
Aboriginal Teacher Development
Reflective theory and practice through a series of hands-on activities designed to encourage both professional renewal and awareness of self as Aboriginal teacher and learner.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Bachelor of Education Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Prerequisite(s): ABED 4F17 (4F87).
Note: may be offered on-site, blended or online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F88.
ABED 4F84
Introduction to Aboriginal Adult Education
Introduction to Aboriginal ways of learning and constructing knowledge and the relationships between culture/education and learning/healing.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Aboriginal Adult Education.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. When course is offered in the Fall term or Winter term, contact hours will be 6 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F14 and ADED 4F84.
ABED 4F85
Aboriginal Curriculum Theory and Design
Introduction to an Aboriginal approach to creating curriculum through a community-based developmental model. Topics include decolonization, relationship between learning and healing, learning outcome development and global Indigenous trends in education.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Aboriginal Adult Education.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. When course is offered in the Fall term or Winter term, contact hours will be 6 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F15 and ADED 4F85.
ABED 4F86
Aboriginal Ways of Teaching and Learning
Issues in Aboriginal and mainstream adult education including learning styles, evaluation, storytelling, experiential learning and lesson planning.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Aboriginal Adult Education.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. When course is offered in the Fall term or Winter term, contact hours will be 6 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F16 and ADED 4F86.
ABED 4F87
Aboriginal Leadership Issues
Relationship between the colonial experience and contemporary Aboriginal leadership; contemporary policy-making processes and the wider role of the Aboriginal trainer/teacher in our communities.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Aboriginal Adult Education.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. When course is offered in the Fall term or Winter term, contact hours will be 6 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F17 and ADED 4F87.
ABED 4F88
Aboriginal Teacher Development
Reflective theory and practice through a series of hands-on activities designed to encourage both professional renewal and awareness of self as Aboriginal teacher and learner.
Facilitated discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Aboriginal Adult Education.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. When course is offered in the Fall term or Winter term, contact hours will be 6 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABED 4F18 and ADED 4F88.
Administrative Co-ordinator
Sarah McGean
905-688-5550, extension 3530
Welch Hall 68
brocku.ca/aboriginaladulted
The Tecumseh Centre for Aboriginal Research and Education offers a Bachelor of Education in Aboriginal Adult Education as well as a Certificate in Aboriginal Adult Education.
Each program is designed to enhance the abilities of individuals working with, or aspiring to work with, adult populations in a variety of educational/training contexts.
The Bachelor of Education in Aboriginal Adult Education incorporates Indigenous learning preferences and cultural diversity, focusing on Turtle Island Indigenous cultures and issues. This community based curriculum model relies on qualified local Indigenous educators to facilitate the learner's educational journey. Courses are offered in a facilitated blended learning cohort model, face-to-face at locations across Ontario as well as online.
The Bachelor of Education in Aboriginal Adult Education program does not lead to an Ontario Certificate of Qualification. For further information contact the Program Co-ordinator.

27

Education - Adult Education
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ADULT EDUCATION COURSES
ADED 1P31
Learning for Success
Self-management, goal setting, study skill and academic integrity, designed to develop the capacity for critical self-reflection about learning.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 1P32
Learning in Digital Contexts
Introduction to learning with contemporary media in digital university-level contexts.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 1P33
Scholarly Writing for Adult Learners
Writing fundamentals of grammar conventions, research skills, essay writing, editing skills and APA formatting.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 2F90
Foundations of Adult Education
Theories, practices and contexts of adult education.
Facilitated online seminar, 72 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, Minors in Adult Education and BECE majors.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4F31.
ADED 2F91
Facilitating Adult Learning
Application and evaluation of facilitation methods.
Facilitated online seminar, 72 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education and BECE majors.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F90.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4F32.
ADED 2F92
Curriculum Design for Adult Learners
Investigation and evaluation of curriculum development models.
Facilitated online seminar, 72 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F91.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4F33.
ADED 2P21
Fostering Adult Creativity and Imagination
Alternate approaches to inform and generate knowledge and personal reflective practice.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 2P22
Gender Issues in Adult Learning
Significant themes influencing adult learners and related educational implications.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 2P41
History of Adult Learning in Canada
Evolution and development, individual informal and formal learning practices, adult education structures through five historical timeframes and the impact of international developments.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 1P41.
ADED 2P50
Post-secondary Online and Blended Learning
Opportunity to examine the potential benefits and challenges of online teaching and learning. Specific strategies and resources that can be utilized to support the development of successful online and blended learning experiences for post-secondary learners.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F92 or program approval.
Note: offered online.
ADED 2P55
Innovative Approaches to Post-secondary Education Issues and Trends
Review of emerging issues affecting the post-secondary education sector as well as the political, economic, sociological and technological trends that may affect the future of post-secondary education in Ontario and Canada.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 2P97
Introduction to Leadership Theory in Adult Education
Major theories, approaches, models and themes related to the study of organizational leadership.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4P96.
ADED 3F90
Work and Learning in Organizations
Investigation of work and learning communities.
Facilitated online seminar, 72 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F92.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4F34.
ADED 3P11
Geragogy: Educating the Third Age Learner
Psychological, sociological and philosophical issues surrounding older adult learning.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students, GERO minors, and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 3P12
Conflict Management: Resolutions and Relationships
Introduction to the concepts and strategies of non-adversarial conflict resolution as it relates to family, the workplace and the community focusing on a conceptual framework for resolving differences in order to maintain and strengthen interpersonal relationships.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 2P11.
ADED 3P22
Learning Disabilities in Adult Education
Best practices in support and accommodation of adults with learning disabilities. Topics include research and legislation in academic and workplace environments.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 3P31
Intercultural Communication in Adult Education
Topics include cultural identity, communication variables and values, and culture as context for communication.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 3P32
Facilitating Adult English Language Learning
Theoretical constructs, language learning contexts, English as a Subsequent Language (ESL) skill areas, integrated approaches, technology in language teaching, assessment and concerns and controversies. Topics in adult learning theory, including immigration, cultural considerations and Canadian culture and language in the Canadian ESL context.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 3P51.
ADED 3P41
Community Outreach and Adult Literacy
Introduction to community outreach in Canada. Community theories, definitions, principles, outreach relation, adult literacy and social advocacy. Outreach for empowering societal change and betterment.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 3P50
Learning by Doing: Experiential Education in Post-secondary Education
Development of a critically informed understanding of the relevant merits of using various experiential learning models. Selecting, planning and developing an experiential learning opportunity, including the design of assessments, teaching and learning activities and resources for industry and community partners.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F92 or program approval.
Note: offered online.
ADED 3P55
Ethical Governance in Post-secondary Education
Theoretical foundations, government agencies and policies that influence university and college academic structures in Ontario and Canada.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 3P91
Power, Practice and Process in Learning
Theoretical, pedagogical, curricular and practical issues of power dynamics and differentials in post-secondary and community outreach.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit in ADED 4P91.
ADED 3P95
Evaluating Learning
Methods and strategies used to develop criteria to evaluate learning in academic, work, community and not-for-profit contexts. Topics include planning and evaluation in both face to face and online environments.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4P94.
ADED 3P97
Application of Leadership Theory in Adult Education
Specific leadership skills relevant to authentic workplace situations.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4P97.
ADED 4D99
Adult Education Honours Thesis
Research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty member.
Facilitated online seminar.  108 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 4F90.
Note: offered online.
ADED 4F90
Research and Critical Reflection in Adult Education
Contemporary issues in adult education.
Facilitated online seminar, 72 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 3F90.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ADED 4F35.
ADED 4P50
Scholarship of Post-secondary Teaching and Learning
Practices related to the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (SoTL) that can have a positive effect on student learning and professional growth.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 4P71
Cost Benefit Analysis in Adult Education Contexts
Knowledge and decision-making skills required to review and assess the costs, benefits, conflicts and tradeoffs associated with educational and training initiatives by exploring assumptions, models and methodologies used in all segments of Canadian society.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 4P85
Independent Study in Adult Education I
Guided reading, study or research on a topic not covered in regular course offerings.
Facilitated online seminar. 36 hours per term.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F90 (4F31).
Note: offered online.
ADED 4P93
Adult Education in the Global Context
Global social, economic and political contexts of adult education.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 4P95
Evaluating Adult Education Programs
Theoretical, ethical and methodological foundations of program evaluation relevant to social and adult educational programming.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Adult Education, BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, BECE students and Adult Education minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
ADED 4V90-4V94
Selected Topics in Adult Education
Topics selected on the basis of Faculty expertise.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F90 (4F31) or program approval.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING COURSES
ADED 4V95-4V99
Practicum in Adult Education
Experiential academic and practical learning related to the field of Adult Education.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: permission of the Adult Education Program Director.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F90 (4F31).
Note: consultation is done prior to enrolment. A written agreement is signed by the Director and filed with the Department.
ADED 4V95
2021-2022: Practicum in Adult Education
Experiential academic and practical learning opportunity with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Facilitated online seminar, 36 hours per term.
Restriction: permission of the Adult Education Program Director.
Prerequisite(s): ADED 2F90 (4F31).
Note: consultation is done prior to enrolment. A written agreement is signed by the Director and filed with the Department.
Administrative Assistant
TBA
905-688-5550, extension 5547
Welch Hall 177
brocku.ca/education/programs/adult-education/
Programs offered are a Bachelor of Education (BEd) in Adult Education, a Certificate in Adult Education and a Minor in Adult Education.
Programs are designed to enhance the abilities of individuals working with, or aspiring to work with, adult populations in a variety of educational/training contexts, as well as those interested in self-study as adult learners. An adult educator's expertise is invaluable not only in adult learning environments like colleges or other post-secondary classrooms, but also in corporations, industrial sites, health care facilities, public service agencies, boardrooms, and anywhere that training and development require a solid foundation in the principles and practices of adult education.
Courses are offered year-round in 4 terms (Fall, Winter, Spring, and Summer) in a facilitated learning cohort model entirely online. Many Adult Education courses have zero textbook costs. For further information contact the Administrative Director.
The Bachelor of Education in Adult Education program does not lead to an Ontario Certificate of Qualification. Those interested in a teaching career in the elementary or secondary school system in Ontario are advised to refer to the Ontario College of Teachers Act 1966 and (Regulation 176/10 Teachers Qualifications) with respect to teachable subjects, definitions, basic qualifications and regulations.

28

Education- Bachelor of Education-Primary and Junior (Aboriginal)

29

Education - Continuing Teacher Education
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
EDUC 9F04
Kindergarten I
Exploring the theoretical foundations, the development of learners, program planning and implementation, assessment, the learning environment and ethical considerations.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: certification in the Primary Division required. Contact the department for permission.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F05
Intermediate Education I
Critical pedagogical lens with which to explore key topics in intermediate education including theoretical foundations, learner development, program planning and implementation, instructional practices, assessment and evaluation, learning environment and ethical considerations related to teaching and learning in a holistic and integrated manner.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the intermediate division in a general education subject.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F06
Intermediate Education II
Critical, pedagogical lens to explore theoretical foundations, learning theory, program planning, development and implementation, instructional design and practices, assessment and evaluation, the learning environment, research and ethical considerations related to teaching and learning across the intermediate division.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the intermediate division in a general education subject.
Prerequisite(s): Intermediate Education I, plus 194 days of successful teaching experience.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F07
Intermediate Education Specialist
Holistic approach to theoretical foundations, learning theory, program planning, development, implementation, instructional design, assessment and evaluation, learning environment, research, ethical considerations and issues related to teaching and learning in the intermediate division. Candidates strengthen professional efficacy, in-depth knowledge, professional judgment for leadership and practice.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the intermediate division in a general education subject.
Prerequisite(s): Intermediate Education II and proof of appropriate regulatory experience required by Ministry of Education Regulation 184/97.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F08
Religious Education in Catholic Schools I
Development of the foundations of religious literacy, ethical studies, and communities of faith and faith development associated with teaching within Ontario Catholic Schools. Exploration of scripture through a Catholic lens combined with strategies and resources for making curriculum and teaching practice connections for the classroom. Social constructivist approach to developing positive learning environments based on personal reflection and interaction with peers and instructor.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F09
Religious Education in Catholic Schools II
Professional practice and extending knowledge and skills through critical reflection and inquiry. Critical pedagogical lens to explore in a holistic and integrated manner the following: mission of Catholic schools, sacred scriptures, spiritual, sacramental and liturgical life, the Church and a post-modern world, faith in action, ethics and morality, pedagogical practices for religious education, school ministry, the faith journey related to teaching and learning across the divisions.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Prerequisite(s): Religious Education in Catholic Schools I, plus 194 days of successful teaching.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F11
French as a Second Language I
Aims of the French program in Ontario schools, methodology; an introduction to linguistics, audiovisual devices, demonstration classes and practice teaching.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): successful completion of an oral and written French language pre-test.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F12
French as a Second Language II
Teaching French as a second language in core and immersion programs at the primary, junior and intermediate levels including Ontario Ministry guidelines, language development, curriculum and unit development, language materials and visits to immersion classes.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Prerequisite(s): French as a Second Language I, plus 194 days of successful teaching.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F21
Reading I
Introduction to language processes of reading and writing. Basic assessment procedures and improvement of reading skills.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F24
Teaching and Learning through E-Learning
Development of expertise as a collaborative teacher-learner in a technology infused environment. Exploration of current educational technologies and pedagogies with a focus on online methods, web-based programs, tools and applications.
Lectures, seminars.
Note: open to certified teachers. May be available on-site, online or blended.
EDUC 9F27
Librarianship I
Understanding the role of the teacher-librarian and collaborative process in developing teaching strategies for resource-based learning. Topics include utilizing and integrating basic library information technology, collection development, print and non-print resource evaluation, introduction to child and adolescent literature, systems, policies and procedures for organizing and distributing resources.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F41
Health Education and Physical Education Primary/Junior I
Activities and practices for teachers of the primary/junior grades, with attention to current theory and philosophy. Primary program and motor skills development in dance, gymnastics and games; health education and organizational procedures. Intramural activities, planned by students and faculty.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the Primary and/or Junior division(s).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F44
Health Education and Physical Education Intermediate/Senior I
Activities and philosophies related to current practices at the intermediate division; program development in dance, gymnastics and game; anatomy and athletic injuries; individual games and activities suitable for these age levels. Intramural activities.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the Intermediate and/or Senior division(s).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F64
Guidance and Career Education I
Counselling, consultation, instruction and program design.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F67
Teaching English Language Learners I
Introduction to the study of Teaching English Language Learners (TELL). Role of the teacher in a multilingual, multicultural, multiracial teaching and learning environment. View of curriculum development and delivery from three perspectives: sociocultural, linguistic and academic.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended. Applicants must be able to communicate well in both written and spoken English.
EDUC 9F68
Teaching English Language Learners II
Further development of methodology-teaching techniques, modification and delivery of instruction. Assessment, evaluation focusing on best practice.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Prerequisite(s): Teaching English Language Learners I, plus 194 days of successful teaching experience.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F69
Teaching English Language Learners, Specialist
Design, implementation and evaluation of an effective TELL program. Development of a theoretical framework for the field of TELL and the role of advocacy and leadership surrounding TELL issues.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Prerequisite(s): Teaching English Language Learners II, and proof of appropriate regulatory experience required by Ministry of Education Regulation 184/97.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F77
Additional Basic Qualification Junior Division
Basic teaching strategies in all subject areas taught at the junior level. Current principles of child development and learning and curriculum at the junior level.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended. For teachers who are seeking qualification in an additional area of concentration in the junior division (Ont. 184/97, Section 30 and 31).
EDUC 9F78
Additional Basic Qualification Primary Division
Basic teaching strategies in all subject areas taught at the primary level. Current principles of child development and learning and curriculum at the primary level.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended. For teachers who are seeking qualification in an additional area of concentration in the primary division (Ont. 184/97, Section 28 and 29).
EDUC 9F84
Mathematics Primary/Junior I
Developmental and learning theories as they apply to teaching strategies for mathematics, including learning processes, organization, motivation and concept development. Examination of mathematics application across the curriculum and in practical application beyond the classroom.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the primary and/or junior division(s).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F85
Mathematics Primary/Junior II
Exploration and application of learning and developmental theories as they apply to teaching and learning mathematics in the elementary grades, including learning processes, organization and lesson planning, impact of culture, gender and motivation on math concept development and understanding. Examines doing math across the curriculum and in practical application beyond the classroom.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the primary and/or junior division(s).
Prerequisite(s): Mathematics Primary/Junior I, plus 194 days of teaching experience.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F86
Mathematics Primary/Junior Specialist
Additional strategies for reviewing, developing and implementing changes in mathematics at the Primary/Junior level. Topics may include assessment strategies for student achievement, diagnostic techniques and programming for students with special needs and abilities.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: must be certified in the primary and/or junior division(s).
Prerequisite(s): Mathematics Primary/Junior II and proof of appropriate regulatory experience required by Ministry of Education Regulation 184/97.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F87
Mathematics Grade 7/8
Developmental and learning theories as they apply to teaching strategies for mathematics at the grade 7 and 8 levels including but not limited to learning processes, organization, motivation and concept development. Practical application beyond the classroom.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F91
Teacher Leadership I
Personal development in teacher leadership. What teacher leadership means in the classroom, the school and the larger community through connections between theory, practice and personal experience. Topics include leadership styles; planning for leadership in schools, classrooms and the community; leadership in education compared to leadership in other organizations; importance of community connections, methods of data collection and analytics to inform decision-making; and how to develop a personal plan for leadership growth including a leadership portfolio.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F95
Teaching Students with Communication Needs (ASD)
Exploration of the foundation of Autism Spectrum Disorder. Focus onteaching and learning effectively in Ontario school settings. Topics includeits history; assessment, diagnosis, and identification; evidence-basedpractice; school-based strategies; individual education plans; and broadersocietal issues related to ASD.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F97
Special Education I
Understanding the Education Act, Ministry curriculum expectations, regulations, policy and the Standards of Practice that support Special Education. Identification of students with exceptionalities; characteristics and definitions of: Behaviour; Communication (Autism, Deaf and Hard of Hearing, Language, Speech Impairments); Intellectual (Giftedness, Mild Intellectual Disability, Developmental Disability); Physical; Multiple. Knowing how to write, develop and amend an IEP, importance of information technology.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F98
Special Education II
Continuing to address categories, definitions and identification of exceptionalities. Knowledge of the qualities and characteristics of ability and disability, formal, informal data, information gathering, tools, tests and assessment strategies to interpret, inform and develop the IEP collaboratively. Examination of board special education programs, plans and services. Learning from and working with students, parents and community partners. Application of information technology.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Prerequisite(s): Special Education I, plus 194 days of successful teaching experience.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9F99
Special Education Specialist
Advanced focus on the categories, definitions and identification of exceptionalities. Analyzing current Ontario legislation, regulations and policies concerning issues related to exceptional students. Leadership in assessing modifying, designing, implementing and communicating programs and services based on current special education research and exemplary practice. Developing effective collaborative approaches and mediation skills with school, parent/guardian and community. Promoting information technology.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Prerequisite(s): Special Education II, and proof of appropriate regulatory experience required by Ministry of Education Regulation 184/97.
Note: May be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M00-9M09
Additional Basic Qualification Intermediate Division
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
EDUC 9M00
Intermediate Basic English
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree that includes two full credits in the subject area.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M01
Intermediate Basic Mathematics
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree that includes two full credits in the subject area.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M02
Intermediate Basic Science - General
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree that includes two full credits in the subject area.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M03
Intermediate Basic History
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree that includes two full credits in the subject area including at least a 0.5 credit recommended in Canadian History.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M04
Intermediate Basic Geography
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree that includes two full credits in the subject area including at least a 0.5 credit recommended in Canadian Geography.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M07
Intermediate Basic Health and Physical Education
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree or previous Health and Physical Education experience.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M20-9M29
Additional Basic Qualification Senior Division (First or Second Teachable)
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
EDUC 9M20
Senior Basic English
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least three full credits in the subject area for a first teachable at the Senior Level or two full credits in the teachable subject area as a second teachable at the Senior level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M21
Senior Basic Mathematics
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least five full credits in the subject area for a first teachable at the Senior Level or three full credits in the teachable subject area as a second teachable at the Senior level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M23
Senior Basic History
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least three full credits in the subject area including at least a 0.5 credit recommended in Canadian History for a first teachable at the Senior Level or two full credits in the subject area with at least a 0.5 credit recommended in Canadian History as a second teachable at the Senior level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M24
Senior Basic Geography
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least three full credits in the subject area including at least a 0.5 credit recommended in Canadian Geography for a first teachable at the Senior Level or at least two full credits in the subject area with at least a 0.5 credit recommended in Canadian Geography as a second teachable at the Senior level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M26
Senior Basic Social Science - General
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least three full credits in the subject area for a first teachable at the Senior Level or two full credits in the subject area as a second teachable at the Senior level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M27
Senior Basic Health and Physical Education
Current principles of student development and learning, curriculum development and implementation, and teaching strategies.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least three full credits in the subject area for a first teachable at the Senior Level or at least two full credits in the subject area as a second teachable at the Senior level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M28
Senior Division Science - Biology ABQ
Teaching and learning strategies that blend educational philosophy with Senior Ontario Biology courses.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least five full credits in the subject area for a first teachable at the Senior Level or at least three full credits in the subject area as a second teachable at the Senior Level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M29
Senior Division Science - Chemistry ABQ
Teaching and learning strategies that blend educational philosophy with Senior Ontario Chemistry courses.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an acceptable undergraduate degree with at least five full credits in the subject area for a first teachable at the Senior Level or at least three full credits in the subject area as a second teachable at the Senior Level (senior basic already showing on COQ).
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M50-9M59
Honours Specialist
Advanced knowledge of curriculum guidelines from K to 12 and increased ability to develop remedial, regular and advanced programs and to evaluate student achievement. Increased knowledge of child and adolescent development related to the subject will also be included.
EDUC 9M50
Honour Specialist English
Advanced knowledge of curriculum guidelines from K to 12 and increased ability to develop remedial, regular and advanced programs and to evaluate student achievement. Increased knowledge of child and adolescent development related to English.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an Ontario Certificate of Qualification or Interim Certificate of Qualification, an acceptable honours degree with at least a second class or equivalent standing in nine full credits in the subject area and at least two years of successful teaching with at least one year in the subject area of qualification being sought.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M51
Honour Specialist Mathematics
Advanced knowledge of curriculum guidelines from K to 12 and increased ability to develop remedial, regular and advanced programs and to evaluate student achievement. Increased knowledge of child and adolescent development related to mathematics.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an Ontario Certificate of Qualification or Interim Certificate of Qualification, an acceptable honours degree with at least a second class or equivalent standing in nine credits in the subject area and at least two years of successful teaching with at least one year in the subject area of qualification being sought.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M53
Honour Specialist History
Advanced knowledge of curriculum guidelines from K to 12 and increased ability to develop remedial, regular and advanced programs and to evaluate student achievement. Increased knowledge of child and adolescent development related to history.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an Ontario Certificate of Qualification or Interim Certificate of Qualification, an acceptable honours degree with at least a second class or equivalent standing in nine full credits in the subject area and at least two years of successful teaching with at least one year in the subject area of qualification being sought.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
EDUC 9M57
Honour Specialist Health and Physical Education
Advanced knowledge of curriculum guidelines from K to 12 and increased ability to develop remedial, regular and advanced programs and to evaluate student achievement. Increased knowledge of child and adolescent development related to physical education.
100 contact hours plus 25 hours of independent study.
Restriction: please contact the department for permission.
Prerequisite(s): an Ontario Certificate of Qualification or Interim Certificate of Qualification, an acceptable honours degree with at least a second class or equivalent standing in nine full credits in the subject area and at least two years of successful teaching with at least one year in the subject area of qualification being sought.
Note: may be offered face-to-face, online or blended.
Administrative Co-ordinator
Jody Boone
905-688-5550, extension 3342
Welch Hall 174
The Continuing Teacher Education program offers a Bachelor of Education Specialist Program as a professional post certification degree that builds on the Three-Session Additional Qualification courses accredited by the Ontario College of Teachers (OCT). This program does not lead to teacher certification in Ontario. Those interested in obtaining an Ontario Certificate of Qualification (OCQ) should consult the Department of Teacher Education.
The Bachelor of Education Specialist Program is a professional degree option for teachers who already hold a Bachelor of Education Degree from an accredited university and are registered with the OCT as eligible to undertake Additional Qualification courses. The Bachelor of Education Specialist degree provides certified teachers with a second professional degree for the purposes of skills and career enhancement. For teachers certified in jurisdictions other than Ontario the Bachelor of Education Specialist Program provides an opportunity to obtain training in specific education areas that may not be available in their home jurisdictions and which will be recorded on university transcripts. The Bachelor of Education Specialist Program is based on Additional Qualification courses that go beyond initial Bachelor of Education degree preparation and provide opportunities and resources for in-depth research and study in the areas of teaching, learning and curriculum.

30

Education - Teacher Education
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ABORIGINAL TEACHER EDUCATION COURSES
ABTE 8P01
Principles and Practices for Professional Certification I-Primary/Junior
Practical experiences in observing and teaching in schools, including teaching centre/internship activities. Integration with ABTE 8P08 through reflective practice, analysis and guided application.
Lectures, seminar, 20 hours per term; plus practicum.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABTE 8L09 and EDUC 8L09.
ABTE 8P02
Principles and Practices for Professional Certification II-Primary/Junior
Practical experiences in observing and teaching in schools, including teaching centre/internship activities. Integration with ABTE 8P08 through reflective practice, analysis and guided application.
Lectures, seminar, 20 hours per term; plus practicum.
Restriction: open to Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABTE 8L09 and EDUC 8L09.
ABTE 8P03
Principles and Practices for Professional Certification III-Primary/Junior
Practical experiences in observing and teaching in schools, including teaching centre/internship activities. Integration with ABTE 8P08 through reflective practice, analysis and guided application.
Lectures, seminar, 20 hours per term; plus practicum.
Restriction: open to Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABTE 8L09 and EDUC 8L09.
ABTE 8P04
Principles and Practices for Professional Certification IV-Primary/Junior
Practical experiences in observing and teaching in schools, including teaching centre/internship activities. Integration with ABTE 8P08 through reflective practice, analysis and guided application.
Lectures, seminar, 20 hours per term; plus practicum.
Restriction: open to Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABTE 8L09 and EDUC 8L09.
ABTE 8P08
Instructional Strategies I
Planning and preparatory aspects of teaching, addressing the ongoing process of diagnosis as essential to such elements of instruction as motivation, classroom management and discipline within the expository discussion and inquiry models of teaching.
Seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P08 and 8P50.
ABTE 8P10
Instructional Strategies II
Sequential to ABTE 8P08. Planning, management, methodological approaches, social and educational issues and evaluation processes.
Seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P10.
ABTE 8P11
Computers in Education
Overview of computer technology in school systems. Computer software packages and evaluation of their use for application in effective curriculum design. Technology across the curriculum, word processing, software evaluation, and the application of spreadsheets and databases.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P11.
ABTE 8P30
Language Primary/Junior
Strategies for the development of communicative competence in listening, speaking, reading and writing. Emphasis on the use of language for learning and thinking across the curriculum. The role and purpose of children's literature in enhancing the learning to read process.
Lectures, seminar, 2.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P30.
ABTE 8P33
Arts Primary/Junior
Introduction to education in and through the arts (dramatic arts, music, visual arts and dance) as defined in provincial documents. Examples of methods for integration of common components of form, function, meaning and communication, with practical applications across the arts, the broader school curriculum and the life of students in the primary and junior grades.
Lectures, seminar, 2.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P33.
ABTE 8P70
Teaching in the Ontario Context
Foundational and method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Connections made between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; may be available on-site, online or blended.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
ABTE 8P75
Practicum for Integrating Teaching, Learning and Assessment
Connections between observations and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Previously learned in foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
ABTE 8P77
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Practice I
Connections between observations and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Previously learned in foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
ABTE 8P78
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Practice II
Connections between observations and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Previously learned in foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
ABTE 8P80
Language and Literacy I
Introduction to the Ontario Language Arts curriculum for the Primary/Junior division. Topics may include literacy theories, children's literature, literacy and assessment, planning, and classroom strategies and tools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P81
Mathematics I
Introduction to the Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in Mathematics. Focus on deeper understanding of mathematical content, processes and ideas. Concepts and procedures that build and connect across the grades and strands.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P83
Cognition and the Socioemotional Development of Learners
Curriculum related to human development and exceptional learners. Topics include cognitive development, memory, meta cognition, socioemotional development, mental health, sociocultural diversity, learning strategies and classroom management.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P84
Teaching Digital Learners in the Digital Age
Technology-enhanced teaching of elementary learners emphasizing the connection between content knowledge from the Ontario curriculum and instructional strategies and pedagogical knowledge for teaching digitally-connected learners. Models of teaching for face-to-face, blended and online environments, curriculum-based lesson activities that blend technology into instruction, and the technical skills for implementing digital learning environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P85
Social Studies
Introduction to the Social Studies curriculum for the Primary/Junior division. Conceptual foundations and instructional practices within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P90
Science and Technology
Knowledge and skills necessary to be a successful Primary/Junior science teacher. Merging practice and theory (praxis) of school science fundamentals essential to 21st-century learning. Topics may include scientific literacy, creativity and science (inquiry), the nature of science, and integration with environmental education.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P92
Language and Literacy II
Understanding of literacy issues and challenges for Indigenous children. Increase knowledge, capacities, and competencies in reading and writing emphasizing Aboriginal literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P93
Mathematics II
Current trends and research based issues in teaching and learning of mathematics focusing on the integration of content knowledge and pedagogy for Primary/Junior Indigenous learners.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P97
The Exceptional Learner
Characteristics of exceptional learners. Topics include socioemotional development, mental health, communication exceptionalities, sociocultural diversity, and physical and multiple exceptionalities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8P98
Health and Physical Education Curriculum and Pedagogy
Twenty-first-century health and physical education, pedagogical content knowledge, the Primary/Junior curriculum, and relevant health and physical education theories and models. Influence of perceptions, self-efficacy, and personal biography on emerging planning and instructional choices/decisions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y04
Current Trends and Issues in Special Education
Current legislation and recent developments related to the education of exceptional students.
Lectures, seminar, practicum, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y04 and 8Y40.
ABTE 8Y05
Professionalism, Law and the Ontario Teacher
Key educational issues, responsibilities and authority in the organization of the public school system in Ontario through study of statues, regulations and professional codes of ethics.
Lectures, seminar, practicum, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y05 and 8Y41.
ABTE 8Y31
Mathematics Primary/Junior
Teaching mathematics at the primary and junior levels: resources, curriculum and methods.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours alternate weeks.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P31.
ABTE 8Y36
Health and Physical Education Primary/Junior
Focus on the implementation of the Ontario health and physical education curriculum in primary and junior grades. Fundamental movement competency, active living, concepts of healthy living, appropriate teaching methods and a philosophical orientation which fosters learning by all.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y36.
ABTE 8Y38
Science and Technology Primary/Junior
Introduction to basic concepts, skills and strategies required for teaching science at the primary/junior school level, including the nature of science, scientific literacy, learning theories, the Ontario Grades 1-6 Science and Technology curriculum, inquiry-based instruction, lesson and unit planning, inclusive science education and cross-curricular integration.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y37.
ABTE 8Y39
Social Studies Primary/Junior
Teaching strategies appropriate to the Ontario curriculum emphasizing knowledge, skills and attitudes for examining and understanding communities, various heritages and citizenship. Key social science concepts; inquiry and communication skills focusing on Canadian identity and democratic values.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y39.
ABTE 8Y50
Literacy Issues in Elementary Education
Origins and treatment of literacy difficulties in minority children.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
ABTE 8Y60
Literacy Issues in Elementary Education II
Increase knowledge, capabilities, competencies in creative written expression, concentrating on Indigenous writers.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y60.
ABTE 8Y61
Classroom Dynamics: Teaching and Learning
Basic principles of child development and learning that guide instructional decision making and classroom management. Topics may include motivation, social contexts of learning, individual differences, student thinking and problem solving, family, school and community partnerships.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y61.
ABTE 8Y63
Introduction to Assessment and Evaluation
Methods for assessment and evaluation of student growth.
Lectures, seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8Y63.
ABTE 8Y71
Practicum for Teaching in the Ontario Context
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Previously learned in foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
ABTE 8Y72
Teaching Aboriginal Learners in the Ontario Context
Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y73
Practicum for Teaching Aboriginal Learners in the Ontario Context
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Previously learned in foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
ABTE 8Y74
Integrating Teaching, Learning and Assessment
Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y76
Professional Collaborative Practice
Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y82
Assessment, Evaluation and Reporting
Basic concepts, skills and practices associated with classroom assessment, evaluation and reporting. Grounded in the purpose and principles of sound assessment, a range of assessment and evaluation methods and practices as explored within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y86
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Music
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in Music. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y87
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Drama
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in Drama. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y88
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Dance
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in Dance. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y89
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Visual Arts
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in Visual Arts. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y95
Professionalism and Law for Educators in Ontario
Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics and legal cases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
ABTE 8Y96
Programming for Inclusive Classrooms
Issues and perspective in special education and educational psychology. Elements of the Individual Education Plan, Universal Design for Learning and Differential Instruction examined in relation to programming in inclusive environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDUCATION - TEACHER EDUCATION COURSES
EDBE 8D01
Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching in Ontario Intermediate/Senior
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics and legal cases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): concurrent students must have successfully completed EDBE 8P50
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of a two-week internship. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G91, 8R64, 8R91, 8Y65 and 8Y66.
EDBE 8F01
Teaching in the Ontario Context Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week plus internship, observation and practicum.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): Concurrent students must have successfully completed EDBE (EDUC) 8P15
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences. Students will be guided in practice teaching for internship and two weeks of practicum. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of a two-week internship. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
EDBE 8F73
Teaching History I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in History emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared History teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared History teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8F74
Teaching English I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in English emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared English teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared English teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8F75
Teaching French as a Second Language I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in French as a Second Language emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared French teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhED (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared French teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8F76
Teaching Visual Arts I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Visual Arts emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies are developed using a variety of resources based on seminar, demonstration and studio activities appropriate for visual arts classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Visual Arts teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Visual Arts teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8F77
Teaching Geography I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Geography emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Geography teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Geography teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8F78
Teaching Drama I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Drama emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies are developed using a variety of resources based on seminar, demonstration appropriate for Drama classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Dramatic Arts teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Dramatic Arts teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8F79
Teaching Science - Biology I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Science - Biology emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies are developed using a variety of resources based on seminar, demonstration and laboratory activities appropriate for science classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Science-Biology Teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Biology teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
EDBE 8F80
Teaching Science - General I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Science - General emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies are developed using a variety of resources based on seminar, demonstration and laboratory activities appropriate for science classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Science-General teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Science-General teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
EDBE 8F81
Teaching Science - Chemistry I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Science - Chemistry emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies are developed using a variety of resources based on seminar, demonstration and laboratory activities appropriate for science classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Science-Chemistry teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Chemistry teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
EDBE 8F82
Teaching Science - Physics I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Science - Physics emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies are developed using a variety of resources based on seminar, demonstration and laboratory activities appropriate for science classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Science-Physics teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Physics teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
EDBE 8F83
Teaching Mathematics I Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the Ontario Intermediate/Senior curriculum in Mathematics emphasizing practice and theory. Planning, instructional and assessment strategies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Mathematics teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Mathematics teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8F84
Teaching Health and Physical Education I Intermediate/Senior
Twenty-first-century health and physical education pedagogical content knowledge, Ontario curriculum, and relevant health and physical education theories and models. Influence of perceptions, self-efficacy and personal biography on emerging health and physical education planning and instructional choices/decisions in Intermediate/Senior classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a declared Health and Physical Education teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared Health and Physical Education teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Course fee required for mandatory Health and Physical Literacy conference.
EDBE 8G11
The Teaching of Green Industries I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Topics may include arboriculture, agriculture, agribusiness, forestry, floristry, horticulture science/management, landscape construction/maintenance, landscaping design and management, LEED construction. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R31, 8Y32 and 8Y33.
EDBE 8G12
The Teaching of Communications Technology I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of media, including the areas of television/video and movie production, radio and audio production, print and graphic communications, photography, and interactive new media and animation. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R34, 8Y35 and 8Y36.
EDBE 8G13
The Teaching of Construction Technology I Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of the practical use of tools and materials associated with fine woodworking, furniture and cabinet making. Creating, reading and understanding working drawings; becoming familiar with common construction materials, components, and processes; perform a variety of fabrication, assembly, and finishing operations. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R37, 8Y38 and 8Y39.
EDBE 8G14
The Teaching of Technological Design I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of a variety of design processes that may be used in solving any technological challenge or problem. Builds on and forms a continuum with the grades seven and eight science and technology program and the grade nine Exploring Technology program. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R43, 8Y44 and 8Y45.
EDBE 8G15
The Teaching of Hospitality and Tourism I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of curriculum documents and resources. Overview of hospitality and tourism areas, as reflected in the various sectors of the tourism industry, emphasizing food service. Culinary techniques of food handling and preparation, health and safety standards, use of tools and equipment, origins of foods, event planning, and Ontario tourism attractions. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R46, 8Y47 and 8Y48.
EDBE 8G16
The Teaching of Manufacturing Technology I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills; design and fabricate products using a variety of processes, tools, and equipment. Processes include technical drawing, properties and preparation of materials, and manufacturing techniques. Projects may include a robotic challenge, design challenge or fabrication project involving machining, welding, vacuum forming, injection moulding. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R49, 8Y50 and 8Y51.
EDBE 8G17
The Teaching of Health Care I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills required in teaching Health Care. May include health promotion, child/adolescent health concerns, and a variety of medical services, treatments, technologies, biotechnology, home care, dental care, nursing fundamentals, dietary study and rules, exercise and disease prevention. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R52, 8Y53 and 8Y54.
EDBE 8G18
The Teaching of Hairstyling and Aesthetics I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Hairstyling, make-up and nail care techniques from a salon/spa perspective. Usage of materials, processes and techniques used in the industry. Teaching of fundamental skills in hairstyling, giving manicures and facials, and providing hair/scalp analyses and treatments. Exploring secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities including apprenticeships and direct-entry work positions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R55, 8Y56 and 8Y57.
EDBE 8G19
The Teaching of Transportation Technology I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to required teaching strategies and skills. Topics include servicing and maintenance of vehicles, aircraft, and/or watercraft. Development of knowledge and skills in construction and operation of vehicle/craft systems and maintenance/repairs. Use of practical and theoretical means to demonstrate the knowledge/skills/values needed to consider the impact of vehicles on human/social/environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R58, 8Y59 and 8Y60.
EDBE 8G20
The Teaching of Computer Technology I (Grades 9 and 10)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to the teaching strategies and skills required, focusing on computer systems, networking, and interfacing, electronics and robotics. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R61, 8Y62 and 8Y63.
EDBE 8G21
The Teaching of Green Industries I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. In-depth study of one or more of arboriculture, agriculture, agribusiness, forestry, floristry, horticulture science/management, LEED construction and associated topics and industries. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education training pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G22
The Teaching of Communications Technology I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. In-depth study of the communication industry; the technical knowledge and skills required to teach component areas such as television/video production, art, broadcasting, photography, web communication, print/graphic production at the senior level. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G23
The Teaching of Construction Technology I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. In-depth study of an extended practical use of tools and materials associated with fine woodworking, furniture and cabinet making. Development of the knowledge and skills related to building construction, zoning regulations, construction techniques, utility systems, sewage and waste disposal and internal and external environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G24
The Teaching of Technological Design I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. In-depth study of the diverse and complex design problems and processes. Variety of design strategies that may be used to solve any technological problem or challenge in areas such as industrial design, mechanical design, architectural design, control system design and/or apparel design. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G25
The Teaching of Hospitality and Tourism I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of curriculum documents and resources. In-depth study of teaching strategies and skills required for planning, operation and development as reflected in the various sectors of the tourism industry, emphasizing food service. Culinary techniques of food handling/preparation, health and safety standards, use of tools/equipment, origins of foods, event planning, and Ontario tourism attractions. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G26
The Teaching of Manufacturing Technology I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. In-depth study of teaching strategies and skills required in teaching of conventional and production machine tools, materials handling, control systems including hydraulics, pneumatics, PLC's, heat treatment of metals, CAD/CAM systems, flow charts, Program Evaluation and Review Techniques (PERT) systems, statistical quality control and product control procedures. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G27
The Teaching of Health Care I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of curriculum documents and resources. In-depth study of required teaching strategies and skills. Processes of disease, factors contributing to health and well-being, and care skills required for children and older adults. Review legislation governing care of children and older adults, evaluate social programs and recreational activities, development of an awareness of health and safety issues, and environmental/social issues. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G28
The Teaching of Hairstyling and Aesthetics I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. In-depth study of hair care/styling, make-up, manicures and personal hygiene. Development of instructional strategies for teaching cosmetology. Variety of applications that will equip students to provide services for diverse clientele. Considers environmental and societal issues related to the industry. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G29
The Teaching of Transportation Technology I (Grades 11 and 12)
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. In-depth study of the teaching strategies and skills required. Expand awareness of environmental and societal issues related to transportation; and apprenticeship and college programs leading to careers in the transportation industry. Use practical and theoretical means to demonstrate the knowledge/skills/values needed to consider the impact of various vehicles on human/social/environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G30
The Teaching of Computer Technology I (Grades 11 and 12)
In-depth study of the teaching strategies and skills required. Examination of computer systems and the control of external devices including the assembly of computers and small networks, installing and configuring hardware and software. Function of key computer components and peripherals, logic gates, fundamental programming concepts, internal numbering and character representation systems, operating systems and networks. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8G91
Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching in Ontario I: Technological Education
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics, and legal cases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8D01, 8R64, 8Y65 and 8Y66.
EDBE 8N20
Invention Literacy: Making and Makerspaces in the P/J/I Classroom
Effective teaching and learning strategies for integrating makerspaces into elementary school classrooms.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs and to BACHYS(Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BAIntegrated Studies(Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BScIntegrated Studies(Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits or permission of the department. In Spring Session open to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate, and to BACHYS(Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours)Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Honours)Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 17.5 overall credits or permission of the department.
Note: offered on-site at the Hamilton Campus. An additional fee is levied for this course.
EDBE 8P02
Integrating Teaching, Learning and Assessment Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Practical experiences teaching in schools. Connections between theory and course work to practicum emphasizing the topics relevant to the Ontario context (i.e., Aboriginal Education, Mental Health, Authentic Assessment and Reporting, English Language Learning, Instructional Strategies).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F01 or 8P01; EDBE 8Y02.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of the in-school internship and practice teaching.
EDBE 8P03
Cognition and the Exceptional Learner Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Integration of curriculum related to human development and exceptional learners. Topics include cognitive development, intellectual exceptionalities, memory, metacognition and learning strategies, behaviour, behavioural exceptionalities, and classroom management.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC(Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P07
French as a Second Language I Junior/Intermediate
Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in French as a Second Language emphasizing practice and theory.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program with a declared French teachable and to BA Integrated Studies Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC(Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits and a declared French teachable.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Course credit will not be given without completion of a successful three-week supervised practicum in FSL teaching.
EDBE 8P08
French as a Second Language II Junior/Intermediate
Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in French as a Second Language emphasizing practice and theory, focusing on spontaneous oral interaction in meaningful contexts, action oriented tasks, unit planning through the lens of differentiated instruction, a range of instructional, assessment and evaluation strategies, and creating a positive learning environment to foster the development of language skills.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and a declared French teachable and to BA Integrated Studies Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared French teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8P07
Note: course credit will not be given without completion of a successful three-week supervised practicum in FSL teaching.
EDBE 8P09
Social Studies Primary/Junior
Introduction to the Social Studies curriculum for the Primary/Junior division. Conceptual foundations and instructional practices within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required for all Hamilton Campus teacher candidates for a mandatory field trip.
EDBE 8P10
Social Studies Junior/Intermediate
Introduction to the Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in Social Studies. Conceptual foundations and instructional practices within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program and to BA Integrated Studies Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P15
Introduction to Teaching, Learning and Schooling - Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Exploration of commonplaces of education, qualities of teaching and methods as related to the Ethical Standards and the Standards of Practice of the Ontario College of Teachers. Connections between theory, experience and reflective practices using narrative inquiry approaches. Progressive and constructivist theory and philosophy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA Child and Youth Studies (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 9.5 overall credits.
Note: students have a field experience for which a Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P15.
EDBE 8P16
Student Assessment, Practice and Policy (Primary/Junior/Intermediate)
Basic concepts, skills and practices associated with classroom assessment, evaluation and reporting. Grounded in the purpose and principles of sound assessment, a range of assessment and evaluation methods and practices as explored within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P24
Language and Literacy I Junior/Intermediate
Introduction to the Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in Language Arts. Topics may include literacy theories, young adult literature, literacy and assessment, planning, and classroom strategies and tools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P27
Science and Technology Junior/Intermediate
Introduction to the Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in Science. Knowledge and pedagogy including critiquing and re-imagining elementary science. Merging of practice and theory (praxis) of school science fundamentals essential to 21st-century learning.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
EDBE 8P29
Mathematics I Junior/Intermediate
Introduction to the Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in Mathematics. Focus on deeper understanding of mathematical content, processes and ideas. Concepts, and procedures that build and connect across the grades and strands.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P34
Language and Literacy I Primary/Junior
Introduction to the Ontario Language Arts curriculum for the Primary/Junior division. Topics may include literacy theories, children's literature, literacy and assessment, planning, and classroom strategies and tools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P35
Developmental Domains and the Exceptional Learner Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Range of developmental domains intertwined with the characteristics of exceptional learners. Topics may include socioemotional development, mental health, communication exceptionalities, sociocultural diversity, and physical and multiple exceptionalities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P37
Science and Technology Primary/Junior
Knowledge and skills necessary to be a successful Primary/Junior science teacher. Merging practice and theory (praxis) of school science fundamentals essential to 21st-century learning. Topics may include scientific literacy, creativity and science (inquiry), the nature of science, and integration with environmental education.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
EDBE 8P39
Mathematics I Primary/Junior
Introduction to the Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in Mathematics. Focus on deeper understanding of mathematical content, processes and ideas. Concepts, and procedures that build and connect across the grades and strands.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P40
Professional Collaborative Communities Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Practical experiences teaching in schools. Small supervised, practicum-based collaborative groups that combine goal setting, professional practice and learning situated within the classroom context.
Lectures, seminar; 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Successful completion of the in-school practice teaching is required.
EDBE 8P41
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities I Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 6 weeks. Successful completion of the in-school practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
EDBE 8P42
Language and Literacy II Primary/Junior
Building on prior in-school practicum experiences to prepare to teach Language Arts in the Primary/Junior divisions within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8P34.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P43
Language and Literacy II Junior/Intermediate
Building on prior in-school practicum experiences to prepare to teach Language Arts in the Junior/Intermediate divisions within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8P24.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P44
Mathematics II Primary/Junior
Current trends and research based issues in teaching and learning of mathematics focusing on the integration of content knowledge and pedagogy for Primary/Junior grades.
Lectures, seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8P39.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P46
Health and Physical Education Curriculum and Pedagogy Primary/Junior
Twenty-first-century health and physical education, pedagogical content knowledge, the Primary/Junior curriculum, and relevant health and physical education theories and models. Influence of perceptions, self-efficacy, and personal biography on emerging planning and instructional choices/decisions.
Lectures, seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Course fee required for mandatory Health and Physical Literacy conference
EDBE 8P47
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities II Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 6 weeks. Successful completion of the in-school practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P57.
EDBE 8P50
Introduction to Teaching, Learning and Schooling Intermediate/Senior
Exploration of the complex relation between epistemology and teachers' practice. Introduction to critical frameworks for analyzing contemporary teaching and learning practices. Reflection upon values, beliefs and assumptions with reference to field experience.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 9.5 overall credits.
Note: students have a field experience for which a Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABTE 8P08, EDUC 8P08 and 8P50.
EDBE 8P54
Mathematics II Junior/Intermediate
Current trends and research based issues in teaching and learning of mathematics focusing on the integration of content knowledge and pedagogy for the Junior/Intermediate grades.
Lectures, seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8P29.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P56
Health and Physical Education Curriculum and Pedagogy Junior/Intermediate
Twenty-first-century health and physical education pedagogical content knowledge, the Ontario curriculum, and relevant health and physical education theories and models. Influence of perceptions, self-efficacy, and personal biography on emerging health and physical education planning and instructional choices/decisions in Junior/Intermediate classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Course fee required for mandatory Health and Physical Literacy conference.
EDBE 8P57
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities II Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement.
Practice teaching
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum 5.0 overall credits, P1 grade in practicum 1 and 2 and approval of program Director.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8P40 or 8Y40 and 8P41
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for four weeks in Ontario schools and two weeks at a school in an international setting. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Students will complete additional mandatory workshops to prepare for the international teaching experience. Successful completion of the in-school practice teaching in Ontario is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P47.
EDBE 8P66
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities II Intermediate/Senior
Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement.
Practice teaching
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits, a P1 grade in practicum 1 and 2 and approval of the program Director.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8P74 and 8P75
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for four weeks in Ontario schools and two weeks at a school in an international setting. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Students will complete additional mandatory workshops to prepare for the international teaching experience. Successful completion of the in-school internship and practice teaching in Ontario is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P76.
EDBE 8P70
Practicum for Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching in Ontario Intermediate/Senior
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics and legal cases. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus internship and practicum.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8D01.
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 12 weeks throughout the year. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of the in-school internship and practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R70.
EDBE 8P71
Student Assessment, Practice and Policy Intermediate/Senior
Basic concepts, skills, practices and emerging policies associated with student assessment and evaluation. Traditional and authentic assessment methods appropriate to Intermediate/Senior school settings.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R71.
EDBE 8P72
Cognition, Development and the Exceptional Learner Intermediate/Senior
Integration of curriculum related to human development and exceptional learners. Topics include cognitive development, intellectual exceptionalities, memory, metacognition and learning strategies, behaviour, behavioural exceptionalities, and classroom management.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R72.
EDBE 8P73
ICT for Teaching and Learning: Intermediate/Senior
Use of technology focusing on teacher technological, pedagogical and content knowledge (TPACK). Models of teaching for face-to-face, blended, and online environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus practicum.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R73.
EDBE 8P74
Professional Collaborative Communities Intermediate/Senior
Small supervised, practicum-based collaborative groups that combine goal setting, professional practice and learning situated within the classroom context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Successful completion of the in-school practice teaching is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R74.
EDBE 8P75
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities I Intermediate/Senior
Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 12 weeks throughout the year. Successful completion of the in-school internship and practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R75.
EDBE 8P76
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities II Intermediate/Senior
Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 12 weeks throughout the year. Successful completion of the in-school internship and practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P66 and 8R76.
EDBE 8P77
Teaching, Research, and Education Inquiry Intermediate/Senior
Development of teachers as experts who employ educational research in their teaching and actively engage in research. Developing teacher awareness of and reflection about their own professional knowledge, values and skills as emerging teachers.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R77.
EDBE 8P78
School and Society Intermediate/Senior
Critical perspectives on the socio-cultural dimensions of schooling and society combined with practical approaches to equity, inclusion and social justice.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8R78.
EDBE 8P82
Teaching History II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching History I Intermediate/Senior.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared History teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared History teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F73.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P83
Teaching English II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching English I Intermediate/Senior.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared English teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared English teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F74.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P84
Teaching French as a Second Language II Intermediate/Senior II
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching French as a Second Language I Intermediate/Senior.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared French teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared French teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F75.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P85
Teaching Visual Arts II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Visual Arts I Intermediate/Senior.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Visual Arts teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Visual Arts teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F76.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P86
Teaching Geography II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Geography I Intermediate/Senior.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Geography teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Geography teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F77.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P87
Teaching Drama II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Drama I Intermediate/Senior.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Dramatic Arts teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Dramatic Arts teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F78.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P88
Teaching Science - Biology II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Science - Biology I Intermediate/Senior. Expanding and applying the understanding of learners, instructional practices, Ontario curriculum, and the science profession furthering professional preparation for teaching intermediate science and senior biology in schools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Biology teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Biology teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F79.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P89
Teaching Science - General II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Science - General I Intermediate/Senior. Expanding and applying the understanding of learners, instructional practices, Ontario curriculum, and the science profession furthering professional preparation for teaching intermediate and senior science in schools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Science-General teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits ad a declared Science-General teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F80.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P90
Teaching Science - Chemistry II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Science - Chemistry I Intermediate/Senior. Expanding and applying understanding of learners, instructional practices, Ontario curriculum, and the science profession furthering professional preparation for teaching intermediate science and senior chemistry in schools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Chemistry teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Chemistry teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F81.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P91
Teaching Science - Physics II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Science - Physics I Intermediate/Senior. Expanding and applying the understanding of learners, instructional practices, Ontario curriculum, and the science profession furthering professional preparation for teaching intermediate science and senior physics in schools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Physics teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Science-Physics teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F82.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P92
Teaching Mathematics II Intermediate/Senior
Connecting prior curriculum knowledge and instructional approaches examined in Teaching Mathematics I Intermediate/Senior. Expanding and applying the understanding of learners, instructional practices, Ontario curriculum, and the mathematics profession furthering professional preparation for teaching intermediate and senior mathematics in schools.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Mathematics teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Mathematics teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F83.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8P93
Teaching Health and Physical Education II Intermediate/Senior
Expanding understandings and application of physical education, physical activity, health education, and health promotion research, theories and models in practice. Exploring the relation between the application of pedagogical content knowledge and intermediate and senior students' physical, emotional, intellectual, and social needs/development within the context of health and physical education classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and a declared Health and Physical Education teachable, and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits and a declared Health and Physical Education teachable.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F84.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Course fee required for mandatory Health and Physical Literacy conference.
EDBE 8R10
Special Topics in Technological Education
Enriched and expanded engagements with topics such as Aboriginal education, coaching, environmental education, international teaching, middle school teaching and urban education.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended. Speakers will present workshops and activities addressing current Provincial programs.
EDBE 8R11
The Teaching of Green Industries II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of one or more of Arboriculture, Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry, Floristry, Horticulture Science/Management, Landscape Construction/Maintenance, Landscaping Design and Management, LEED construction and associated topics and industries.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G11 or equivalent
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R12
The Teaching of Communications Technology II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study from a media perspective including the areas of television/video and movie production, radio and audio production, print and graphic communications, photography, and interactive new media and animation. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G12 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R13
The Teaching of Construction Technology II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of the practical use of tools and materials associated with fine woodworking, furniture and cabinet making. Creating, reading and understanding working drawings; becoming familiar with common construction materials, components, and processes; perform a variety of fabrication, assembly, and finishing operations. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G13 or equivalent.
Note: May be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R14
The Teaching of Technological Design II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of a variety of design processes that may be used in solving any technological challenge or problem. Builds on and forms a continuum with the grades seven and eight science and technology program and the grade nine Exploring Technology program. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G14 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R15
The Teaching of Hospitality and Tourism II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of curriculum documents and resources. Overview of hospitality and tourism areas, as reflected in the various sectors of the tourism industry, emphasizing food service. Culinary techniques of food handling and preparation, health and safety standards, use of tools and equipment, origins of foods, event planning, and Ontario tourism attractions. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G15 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R16
The Teaching of Manufacturing Technology II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of teaching strategies and skills; design and fabricate products using a variety of processes, tools, and equipment. Processes include technical drawing, properties and preparation of materials, and manufacturing techniques. Projects may include a robotic challenge, design challenge or fabrication project involving machining, welding, vacuum forming, injection moulding. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G16 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R17
The Teaching of Health Care II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of health promotion, child/adolescent health concerns, and a variety of medical services, treatments, technologies, biotechnology, home care, dental care, nursing fundamentals, dietary study and rules, exercise and disease prevention. Exploring secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities including apprenticeships and direct-entry work positions.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G17 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R18
The Teaching of Hairstyling and Aesthetics II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of hairstyling, make-up and nail care techniques from a salon/spa perspective. Usage of materials, processes and techniques used in the industry. Teaching of fundamental skills in hairstyling, giving manicures and facials, and providing hair/scalp analyses and treatments. Exploring secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities including apprenticeships and direct-entry work positions.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G18 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R19
The Teaching of Transportation Technology II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of required teaching strategies and skills. Topics include servicing and maintenance of vehicles, aircraft, and/or watercraft. Development of knowledge and skills in construction and operation of vehicle/craft systems and maintenance/repairs. Use of practical and theoretical means to demonstrate the knowledge/skills/values needed to consider the impact of vehicles on human/social/environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G19 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R20
The Teaching of Computer Technology II (Grades 9 and 10)
Further study of teaching strategies and skills required, focusing on computer systems, networking, and interfacing, electronics and robotics. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G20 or equivalent.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R21
The Teaching of Green Industries II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of teaching strategies and skills required, focusing on computer systems, networking, and interfacing, electronics and robotics. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G21.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R22
The Teaching of Communications Technology II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of the communication industry; the technical knowledge and skills required to teach component areas such as television/video production, art, broadcasting, photography, web communication, print/graphic production at the senior level. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G22.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R23
The Teaching of Construction Technology II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of extended practical use of tools and materials associated with fine woodworking, furniture and cabinet making. Development of the knowledge and skills related to building construction, zoning regulations, construction techniques, utility systems, sewage and waste disposal and internal and external environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R24
The Teaching of Technological Design II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of the diverse and complex design problems and processes. Variety of design strategies that may be used to solve any technological problem or challenge in areas such as industrial design, mechanical design, architectural design, control system design and/or apparel design. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G24.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R25
The Teaching of Hospitality and Tourism II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of teaching strategies and skills required for planning, operation and development as reflected in the various sectors of the tourism industry, emphasizing food service. Culinary techniques of food handling/preparation, health and safety standards, use of tools/equipment, origins of foods, event planning, and Ontario tourism attractions. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G25.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R26
The Teaching of Manufacturing Technology II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of teaching strategies and skills required in teaching of conventional and production machine tools, materials handling, control systems including hydraulics, pneumatics, PLC's, heat treatment of metals, CAD/CAM systems, flow charts, Program Evaluation and Review Techniques (PERT) systems, statistical quality control and product control procedures. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G26.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R27
The Teaching of Health Care II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of required teaching strategies and skills. Processes of disease, factors contributing to health and well-being, and care skills required for children and older adults. Review legislation governing care of children and older adults, evaluate social programs and recreational activities, development of an awareness of health and safety issues, and environmental/social issues. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G27.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R28
The Teaching of Hairstyling and Aesthetics II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of hair care/styling, make-up, manicures and personal hygiene. Development of instructional strategies for teaching cosmetology. Variety of applications that will equip students to provide services for diverse clientele. Considers environmental and societal issues related to the industry. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G28.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R29
The Teaching of Transportation Technology II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of the teaching strategies and skills required. Expand awareness of environmental and societal issues related to transportation; and apprenticeship and college programs leading to careers in the transportation industry. Use practical and theoretical means to demonstrate the knowledge/skills/values needed to consider the impact of various vehicles on human/social/environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G29.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R30
The Teaching of Computer Technology II (Grades 11 and 12)
Further study of the teaching strategies and skills required. Examination of computer systems and the control of external devices including the assembly of computers and small networks, installing and configuring hardware and software. Function of key computer components and peripherals, logic gates, fundamental programming concepts, internal numbering and character representation systems, operating systems and networks. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Corequisite(s): EDBE 8G30.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8R31
Teaching of Green Industries I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Topics may include arboriculture, agriculture, agribusiness, forestry, floristry, horticulture science/management, landscape construction/maintenance, landscaping design and management, LEED construction. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G11.
EDBE 8R34
Teaching Communications Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of media, including the areas of television/video and movie production, radio and audio production, print and graphic communications, photography, and interactive new media and animation. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G12.
EDBE 8R37
The Teaching of Construction Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of the practical use of tools and materials associated with fine woodworking, furniture and cabinet making. Creating, reading and understanding working drawings; becoming familiar with common construction materials, components, and processes; perform a variety of fabrication, assembly, and finishing operations. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G13.
EDBE 8R43
The Teaching of Technological Design I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of a variety of design processes that may be used in solving any technological challenge or problem. Builds on and forms a continuum with the grades seven and eight science and technology program and the grade nine Exploring Technology program. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G14.
EDBE 8R46
The Teaching of Hospitality and Tourism I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of curriculum documents and resources. Overview of hospitality and tourism areas, as reflected in the various sectors of the tourism industry, emphasizing food service. Culinary techniques of food handling and preparation, health and safety standards, use of tools and equipment, origins of foods, event planning, and Ontario tourism attractions. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G15.
EDBE 8R49
The Teaching of Manufacturing Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills; design and fabricate products using a variety of processes, tools, and equipment. Processes include technical drawing, properties and preparation of materials, and manufacturing techniques. Projects may include a robotic challenge, design challenge or fabrication project involving machining, welding, vacuum forming, injection moulding. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program .
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G16.
EDBE 8R52
The Teaching of Health Care I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills required in teaching Health Care. May include health promotion, child/adolescent health concerns, and a variety of medical services, treatments, technologies, biotechnology, home care, dental care, nursing fundamentals, dietary study and rules, exercise and disease prevention. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G17.
EDBE 8R55
The Teaching of Hairstyling and Aesthetics I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Hairstyling, make-up and nail care techniques from a salon/spa perspective. Usage of materials, processes and techniques used in the industry. Teaching of fundamental skills in hairstyling, giving manicures and facials, and providing hair/scalp analyses and treatments. Exploring secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities including apprenticeships and direct-entry work positions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G18.
EDBE 8R58
The Teaching of Transportation Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to required teaching strategies and skills. Topics include servicing and maintenance of vehicles, aircraft, and/or watercraft. Development of knowledge and skills in construction and operation of vehicle/craft systems and maintenance/repairs. Use of practical and theoretical means to demonstrate the knowledge/skills/values needed to consider the impact of vehicles on human/social/environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G19.
EDBE 8R61
The Teaching of Computer Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 1
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to the teaching strategies and skills required, focusing on computer systems, networking, and interfacing, electronics and robotics. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G20.
EDBE 8R64
Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching Part 1
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics, and legal cases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8D01 and 8G91.
EDBE 8R70
Practicum for Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching in Ontario: Technological Education
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 12 weeks throughout the year. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of the in-school internship and practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P70.
EDBE 8R71
Student Assessment, Practice and Policy: Technological Education
Basic concepts, skills, practices, and emerging policies associated with student assessment and evaluation. Traditional and authentic assessment methods appropriate to technological education secondary school settings.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P71.
EDBE 8R72
Cognition, Development and the Exceptional Learner: Technological Education
Integration of curriculum related to human development and exceptional learners. Topics include cognitive development, intellectual exceptionalities, memory, metacognition and learning strategies, behaviour, behavioural exceptionalities, and classroom management.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P72.
EDBE 8R73
ICT for Teaching and Learning: Technological Education
Use of technology focusing on teacher technological, pedagogical and content knowledge (TPACK). Models of teaching for face-to-face, blended, and online environments.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P73.
EDBE 8R74
Professional Collaborative Communities: Technological Education
Small supervised, practicum-based collaborative groups combining goal setting, professional practice, and learning situated within the classroom context.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P74.
EDBE 8R75
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities I: Technological Education
Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement and practice teaching.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8R70.
Note: Students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 12 weeksthroughout the year. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of the in-school internshipand practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum feewill be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P75.
EDBE 8R76
Practicum for Professional Collaborative Communities II: Technological Education
Observation and practice teaching in field-based school placement and practice teaching.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8R70.
Note: Students will be guided in practice teaching for at least 12 weeksthroughout the year. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of the in-school internshipand practice teaching is required. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum feewill be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P66 and 8P76.
EDBE 8R77
Teacher as Researcher: Technological Education
Development of teachers as experts who employ educational research in their teaching and actively engage in research. Developing teacher awareness of and reflection about their own professional knowledge, values and skills as emerging teachers.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P77.
EDBE 8R78
School and Society: Technological Education
Issues related to the complex relationship between schools and the society in Ontario. Key themes include contemporary goals of education, the organization of schools, student diversity and difference, and family and community relationships with schools.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P78.
EDBE 8R91
Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching in Ontario II: Technological Education
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics, and legal cases. Sessions divided between instructional methods and field experiences.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8G91 or equivalent
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8D01.
EDBE 8Y01
Assessment, Evaluation and Reporting Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Basic concepts, skills and practices associated with classroom assessment, evaluation and reporting. Grounded in the purpose and principles of sound assessment, a range of assessment and evaluation methods and practices as explored within the Ontario context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y02
Practicum for Teaching in the Ontario Context Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Concepts, theories and practices explored in Integrating, Teaching, Learning and Assessment are practised and demonstrated in an educational setting in Ontario.
Practice teaching.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F01.
Note: course credit will not be given without successful completion of practice teaching. Transportation to school placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
EDBE 8Y03
Socioemotional/Physical Processes and the Exceptional Learner Intermediate/Senior
Addressing and integrating developmental domains, human development, and the characteristics of exceptional learners. Topics include socio-emotional development, mental health, communication exceptionalities, sociocultural diversity, and physical and multiple exceptionalities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8Y93.
EDBE 8Y04
Special Topics: Teaching in Middle School (Grades 7 and 8)
Introduction to the middle school context: being a generalist teacher, the grade 7 and 8 curriculum, the culture of elementary/middle schools, and the transition to secondary school.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y05
Programming for the Inclusive Classroom Intermediate/Senior
Issues and perspectives in special education and educational psychology. Elements of the Individual Education Plan, Universal Design for Learning and Differentiated Instruction examined in relation to programming in inclusive environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8Y95.
EDBE 8Y06
Special Topics: Environmental Education in Secondary Schools
Introduction to environmental education in Secondary Schools. Integrating Environmental Education across all curricular areas and school-wide initiatives (e.g. Ecoschools Ontario).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y08
Teaching Digital Learners in the Digital Age Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Technology-enhanced teaching of elementary learners emphasizing the connection between content knowledge from the Ontario curriculum and instructional strategies and pedagogical knowledge for teaching digitally-connected learners. Models of teaching for face-to-face, blended and online environments, curriculum-based lesson activities that blend technology into instruction, and the technical skills for implementing digital learning environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y12
Special Topics: Student Success Programs (Grades 7 to 12)
Introduction to alternative programming that exists in Secondary Schools: Specialist High Skills Major, alternative credit options, Cooperative education, Dual Credit Programs.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y14
Special Topics: Aboriginal Education in Secondary Schools
Introducing Indigenous perspectives and issues to Secondary students. Integrating Aboriginal content and strategies across the curriculum.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Intermediate/Senior program with a minimum 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y21
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Dance Primary/Junior
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in the Arts discipline of Dance. Theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8Y25 and 8Y27 (EDBE 8P12).
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P48.
EDBE 8Y22
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Dance Junior/Intermediate
Exploring theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy in the Arts discipline of Dance for teaching in Junior/Intermediate classrooms.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/(Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8Y26 and 8Y28 (EDBE 8P14).
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P58.
EDBE 8Y23
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Drama Primary/Junior
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in the Arts discipline of Drama. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8Y25 and 8Y27 (EDBE 8P12).
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P48.
EDBE 8Y24
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Drama Junior/Intermediate
Exploring theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy in the Arts discipline of Drama for teaching in the Junior/Intermediate classrooms.
Lectures, seminars, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8Y26 and 8Y28 (EDBE 8P14).
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P58.
EDBE 8Y25
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Music Primary/Junior
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in the Arts discipline of Music. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary Junior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P12.
EDBE 8Y26
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Music Junior/Intermediate
Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in the Arts discipline of Music. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P14.
EDBE 8Y27
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Visual Arts Primary/Junior
Ontario Primary/Junior curriculum in the Arts discipline of Visual Arts. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P12.
EDBE 8Y28
The Arts In and Across the Curriculum: Visual Arts Junior/Intermediate
Ontario Junior/Intermediate curriculum in the Arts discipline of Visual Arts. Exploration of theory into practice, instructional strategies and pedagogy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Junior/Intermediate program and to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P14.
EDBE 8Y30
Reflecting on Teaching and Learning: Theory to Practice Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Using field placement experiences, connections between theory and practice will be emphasized through topics that focus on FNMI, Mental Health and English Language Learning.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 20.0 credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F01 and EDBE 8Y02.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Course credit will not be given without the successful completion of the in-school internship and practice teaching.
EDBE 8Y32
Teaching of Green Industries I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Topics may include arboriculture, agriculture, agribusiness, forestry, floristry, horticulture science/management, landscape construction/maintenance, landscaping design and management, LEED construction. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G11.
EDBE 8Y33
Teaching of Green Industries I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Topics may include arboriculture, agriculture, agribusiness, forestry, floristry, horticulture science/management, landscape construction/maintenance, landscaping design and management, LEED construction. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities..
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G11.
EDBE 8Y35
Teaching Communications Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of media, including the areas of television/video and movie production, radio and audio production, print and graphic communications, photography, and interactive new media and animation. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G12.
EDBE 8Y36
Teaching Communications Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of media, including the areas of television/video and movie production, radio and audio production, print and graphic communications, photography, and interactive new media and animation. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G12.
EDBE 8Y38
The Teaching of Construction Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of the practical use of tools and materials associated with fine woodworking, furniture and cabinet making. Creating, reading and understanding working drawings; becoming familiar with common construction materials, components, and processes; perform a variety of fabrication, assembly, and finishing operations. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: .
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G13.
EDBE 8Y39
The Teaching of Construction Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of the practical use of tools and materials associated with fine woodworking, furniture and cabinet making. Creating, reading and understanding working drawings; becoming familiar with common construction materials, components, and processes; perform a variety of fabrication, assembly, and finishing operations. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G13.
EDBE 8Y40
Professional Collaborative Communities Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Practical experiences teaching in schools. Small, supervised, practicum-based collaborative groups that combine goal setting, professional practice and learning situated within the classroom context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per session
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): EDBE 8F01 or EDBE 8P01, EDBE 8P02 or EDBE 8Y30 and EDBE 8Y02
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended. Successful completion of the in-school practice teaching is required.
EDBE 8Y41
Professionalism and Law for Educators in Ontario Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics and legal cases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y42
Programming for Inclusive Classrooms Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Issues and perspectives in special education and educational psychology. Elements of the Individual Education Plan, Universal Design for Learning and Differentiated Instruction examined in relation to programming in inclusive environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y43
Teaching, Research, and Education Inquiry Primary/Junior/Intermediate
Development of teachers as experts who employ educational research in their teaching and actively engage in research on their practice.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate programs with a minimum 5.0 overall credits and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 26.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8Y44
The Teaching of Technological Design I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of a variety of design processes that may be used in solving any technological challenge or problem. Builds on and forms a continuum with the grades seven and eight science and technology program and the grade nine Exploring Technology program. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G14.
EDBE 8Y45
The Teaching of Technological Design I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Overview of a variety of design processes that may be used in solving any technological challenge or problem. Builds on and forms a continuum with the grades seven and eight science and technology program and the grade nine Exploring Technology program. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G14.
EDBE 8Y47
The Teaching of Hospitality and Tourism I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of curriculum documents and resources. Overview of hospitality and tourism areas, as reflected in the various sectors of the tourism industry, emphasizing food service. Culinary techniques of food handling and preparation, health and safety standards, use of tools and equipment, origins of foods, event planning, and Ontario tourism attractions. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G15.
EDBE 8Y48
The Teaching of Hospitality and Tourism I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of curriculum documents and resources. Overview of hospitality and tourism areas, as reflected in the various sectors of the tourism industry, emphasizing food service. Culinary techniques of food handling and preparation, health and safety standards, use of tools and equipment, origins of foods, event planning, and Ontario tourism attractions. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G15.
EDBE 8Y50
The Teaching of Manufacturing Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills; design and fabricate products using a variety of processes, tools, and equipment. Processes include technical drawing, properties and preparation of materials, and manufacturing techniques. Projects may include a robotic challenge, design challenge or fabrication project involving machining, welding, vacuum forming, injection moulding. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: .
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G16.
EDBE 8Y51
The Teaching of Manufacturing Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills; design and fabricate products using a variety of processes, tools, and equipment. Processes include technical drawing, properties and preparation of materials, and manufacturing techniques. Projects may include a robotic challenge, design challenge or fabrication project involving machining, welding, vacuum forming, injection moulding. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G16.
EDBE 8Y53
The Teaching of Health Care I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills required in teaching Health Care. May include health promotion, child/adolescent health concerns, and a variety of medical services, treatments, technologies, biotechnology, home care, dental care, nursing fundamentals, dietary study and rules, exercise and disease prevention. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: .
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G17.
EDBE 8Y54
The Teaching of Health Care I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to teaching strategies and skills required in teaching Health Care. May include health promotion, child/adolescent health concerns, and a variety of medical services, treatments, technologies, biotechnology, home care, dental care, nursing fundamentals, dietary study and rules, exercise and disease prevention. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities..Restriction: .Note: may be or blended.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G17.
EDBE 8Y56
The Teaching of Hairstyling and Aesthetics I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Hairstyling, make-up and nail care techniques from a salon/spa perspective. Usage of materials, processes and techniques used in the industry. Teaching of fundamental skills in hairstyling, giving manicures and facials, and providing hair/scalp analyses and treatments. Exploring secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities including apprenticeships and direct-entry work positions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G18.
EDBE 8Y57
The Teaching of Hairstyling and Aesthetics I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Hairstyling, make-up and nail care techniques from a salon/spa perspective. Usage of materials, processes and techniques used in the industry. Teaching of fundamental skills in hairstyling, giving manicures and facials, and providing hair/scalp analyses and treatments. Exploring secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities including apprenticeships and direct-entry work positions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G18.
EDBE 8Y59
The Teaching of Transportation Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to required teaching strategies and skills. Topics include servicing and maintenance of vehicles, aircraft, and/or watercraft. Development of knowledge and skills in construction and operation of vehicle/craft systems and maintenance/repairs. Use of practical and theoretical means to demonstrate the knowledge/skills/values needed to consider the impact of vehicles on human/social/environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G19.
EDBE 8Y60
The Teaching of Transportation Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry curriculum documents and resources. Introduction to required teaching strategies and skills. Topics include servicing and maintenance of vehicles, aircraft, and/or watercraft. Development of knowledge and skills in construction and operation of vehicle/craft systems and maintenance/repairs. Use of practical and theoretical means to demonstrate the knowledge/skills/values needed to consider the impact of vehicles on human/social/environmental systems. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G19.
EDBE 8Y62
The Teaching of Computer Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 2
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to the teaching strategies and skills required, focusing on computer systems, networking, and interfacing, electronics and robotics. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G20.
EDBE 8Y63
The Teaching of Computer Technology I (Grades 9 and 10) Part 3
Examination of Ontario Ministry, board and school curriculum documents and other resources. Introduction to the teaching strategies and skills required, focusing on computer systems, networking, and interfacing, electronics and robotics. Exploration of secondary and post-secondary education pathways and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8G20.
EDBE 8Y65
Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching Part 2
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics, and legal cases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8D01 and 8G91.
EDBE 8Y66
Professionalism, Law and Principles of Teaching Part 3
Connections between observation and experiences in field-based school placements to theory, practice and reflection. Foundational method components and strategies of classroom and curriculum as related to the Ontario Curriculum and the Ontario College of Teachers Foundations of Professional Practice. Professional and legal responsibilities of Ontario educators and schools examined through the study of statutes, regulations, professional codes of ethics, and legal cases.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8D01 and 8G91.
EDBE 8Y92
Professional Collaborative Communities I: Technological Education
Small supervised, practicum-based collaborative groups combining goal setting, professional practice and learning situated within the classroom context.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P74.
EDBE 8Y93
Socioemotional/Physical Processes and the Exceptional Learner: Technological Education
Addressing and integrating developmental domains, human development, and the characteristics of exceptional learners. Topics include socio-emotional development, mental health, communication exceptionalities, sociocultural diversity, physical and multiple exceptionalities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8Y03.
EDBE 8Y94
Professional Collaborative Communities II: Technological Education
Small supervised, practicum-based collaborative groups combining goal setting, professional practice and learning situated within the classroom context.
Lectures, seminar.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the the Technological Education program.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8P74.
EDBE 8Y95
Programming for the Inclusive Classroom: Technological Education
Issues and perspectives in special education and educational psychology. Elements of the Individual Education Plan, Universal Design for Learning and Differentiated Instruction examined in relation to programming in inclusive environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Technological Education program with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDBE 8Y05.
NON-CREDIT COURSES
EDBE 8N15
Environmental/Outdoor Education
Approaches to and philosophies of outdoor/environmental education and its development. Application of skills and knowledge in curricular decision-making processes.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior and Junior/Intermediate, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits or permission of the department. In Spring Session open to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 17.5 overall credits or permission of the department.
Note: offered on-site, online or blended. Course not required for Outdoor Education teaching placement. An additional fee is levied for this course.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade in EDUC 8N15 and 8Y15.
EDBE 8N46
Special Topics-Early Primary Learning in Kindergarten Classrooms
Developmental experience of the young child and the philosophical and pedagogical foundations of the full-day kindergarten program.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior program, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits or permission of the department. In Spring session open to the Primary/Junior program, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 17.5 overall credits or permission of the department.
Note: may be offered on-site, blended, or online. This course is not required in order to request a kindergarten practicum placement.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P46.
EDBE 8N50
Religious Education (Roman Catholic) Primary/Junior/Intermediate/Senior
Introduction to the history of Catholic schools and education in Ontario and the theological and pedagogical underpinnings of religious education programs. Focus on integration of gospel values as foundational throughout the curriculum.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate and Intermediate/Senior program and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BED (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits or permission of the department. In Spring Session open to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 17.5 overall credits or permission of the department.
Note: offered online. This course is not a substitute for Part I of the OECTA/OCSTA Religious Education course. Designed to implement the Guidelines in Preparation of Students to Teach Religion in Catholic Schools approved by the Institute for Catholic Education, the Ontario English Catholic Teachers Association, and the Ontario Separate School Trustees Association. Materials fee required.
EDBE 8N55
The Occasional Teacher
Addresses strategies that occasional teachers can employ to implement effective classroom management techniques, preparing to teach a wide range of subjects and grade levels.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate, Intermediate/Senior programs, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits or permission of the department. In Spring Session open to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate, Intermediate/Senior programs, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 17.5 overall credits or permission of the department.
Note: offered on-site, online or blended.
EDBE 8N58
Coaching School Athletes
Teacher candidates engage in a critical examination of the structures of coaching pedagogy within the context of the Ontario educational system.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate, Intermediate/Senior programs, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA IASC (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 20.0 overall credits. In Spring Session open to the Primary/Junior, Junior/Intermediate, Intermediate/Senior programs, and to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours) Integrated Studies/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 17.5 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Administrative Co-ordinators
St. Catharines Campus
Janice Kit
905-688-5550, extension 3341
Welch Hall 110
Hamilton Campus
Wendy Muir
905-688-5550, extension 3610
Hamilton Campus 41A
Placement Officer
St. Catharines and Hamilton Campuses
Michelle Smythe
905-688-5550, extension 4967
Welch Hall 111
Placement Officer
St. Catharines and Hamilton Campuses
Diem Chanhsavang
905-688-5550, extension
Welch Hall
Administrative Assistant, Practicum
St. Catharines and Hamilton Campuses
Natalie Reynolds
905-688-5550, extension 5746
Welch Hall 109
Partnership Co-ordinator
St. Catharines and Hamilton Campuses
Dorothy Buchanan
905-688-5550, extension 5312
Welch Hall 112
Office Assistant, Associate Dean's Office
Brittany Nagy
905-688-5550, extension 6301
Welch Hall 123
Housed within the Department of Educational Studies, the Teacher Education program offers three programs of study at the St. Catharines and Hamilton campuses for candidates interested in teaching Primary/Junior (grades K-6), Junior/Intermediate (grades 4-10) and Intermediate/Senior (grades 7-12). Field placements for the Junior/Intermediate program will normally be made in grades 4-8. Field placements for the Intermediate/Senior program will normally be made in grades 9-12.
In addition, the Teacher Education program co-operates with other departments in offering concurrent programs leading to the conferring of a BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Child and Youth Studies (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate).
Teacher Education programs are field oriented and are based on an approach unique in Ontario. Much of the orientation to and instruction in professional practice takes place through supervised cohorts of teacher candidates in schools throughout the Niagara Peninsula and the regions of Hamilton Wentworth, Haldimand-Brant, Halton and Peel. Transportation to required off-campus courses, professional development events and schools is the responsibility of the teacher candidate. Candidates who are accepted into the BEd program to teach in secondary schools are assigned to work with specialized subject area instructors from secondary schools.
The Teacher Education program reserves the right to assign Concurrent and Consecutive students to either the Hamilton or St Catharines campus. Students are responsible for their own transportation for practice teaching, courses and other activities related to the program, which may be scheduled at locations other than the assigned campus.
Upon acceptance into the program, applicants must complete a satisfactory Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening. School Boards require teacher candidates to complete this background screening prior to having direct contact with students. Otherwise schools will not allow teacher candidates to participate in practice teaching. In addition, the Ontario College of Teachers requires a separate Police record check before certification.
The Teacher Education program is organized subject to the requirements of Brock University and outside regulatory organizations that govern teacher education in Ontario (e.g. the Ontario College of Teachers). The program requirements for the Teacher Education program may change in order to meet the outside regulatory requirements.
Teacher candidates who have successfully completed all required courses in the program for a BEd will normally be recommended to the Ontario College of Teachers for an Ontario Certificate of Qualification.
An essential part of the Teacher Education program takes place in schools with at least 80 days of observation and teaching. When performance in the practicum placement is regarded as inadequate, the teacher candidate will be assessed by the Practice Teaching Co-ordinator or designate. That assessment will determine eligibility to proceed. Where performance so warrants, and in the interest of the pupils' welfare, the Teacher Education program will not place a teacher candidate in a classroom or will remove a teacher candidate from the classroom.
All teacher candidates are advised to refer to the policies and procedures in the Teacher Education Program Handbook.
For further information regarding the Teacher Education programs, candidates should contact the Director.
Those interested in a teaching career in Ontario are advised to refer to the Ontario College of Teachers Act 1996 and Regulation 176/10 Teachers Qualifications with respect to teachable subjects, definitions, basic qualifications and regulations.

31

Education - Concurrent BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior)

32

Education - Concurrent BA Child and Youth Studies (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior)

33

Education - Concurrent BA (Honours)/BEd Junior/Intermediate

34

Education - Concurrent BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate)

35

Education - Concurrent BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior)

36

Education - Concurrent BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate)

37

Education - Concurrent BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior)

38

Educational Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
EDUCATION COURSES
EDUC 1F90
Introduction to Education Studies
The broad field of educational studies from a variety of theoretical perspectives.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
EDUC 1F95
Introduction to Foundations of Education
Historical, philosophical, sociological and psychological dimensions of formal schooling within a Canadian context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 3.0 overall credits, and BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
*EDUC 2F95
Indigenous Culture and Early Childhood Education
(also offered as INDG 2F95)
Introduction of the culture of a selected Indigenous Society to early childhood educators.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F96.
EDUC 2P65
Diversity Issues in Schooling
Issues and directions in a diverse society and their impact in the classroom; includes classism, racism, multiculturalism, ablism and sexism; roles and strategies leading to the goal of equity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 8P02.
*EDUC 2Q91
Indigenous Ways of Knowing
(also offered as CANA 2Q91 and PHIL 2Q91)
Exploration of philosophical and practical applications of Indigenous epistemologies and ontologies in the context of education and civilization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 2Q90.
EDUC 3F01
The Process of Teaching
Introduction to the study of teacher behaviour through a systematic exploration of the assumptions, educational purposes, teaching strategies, curricular designs and materials and the social and psychological theory underlying selected models of teaching. The alternative patterns by which teachers may model their behaviour.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: students will be required to familiarize themselves with current educational concepts and recent literature in the field.
*EDUC 3F02
Cognition and Learning
(also offered as CHYS 3F02)
Psychological approaches to cognitive, behavioural and social development. Cognitive processes in learning and instruction (assisting students to use appropriate cognitive processes on specific academic tasks). Cognitive theories applied to school subject areas including reading, writing, mathematics and science.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): CHYS 1F90 or permission of the Department.
EDUC 3F90
Independent Study
Topic, readings and methods of evaluation chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: permission of the Chair.
Note: consultation is done prior to enrolment. A written agreement is signed by the Chair and filed with the department.
EDUC 3P00
Foundations of Curriculum
Explores models of curriculum from historical, philosophical and pedagogical perspectives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or to BECE majors until date specified in Registration guide.
EDUC 3P40
Family, Schools and Literacy
Research and issues in family literacy and parental involvement in education. Strategies for intervention and home-school collaboration in literacy development.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 6.0 overall credits and to BECE students until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: optional practicum may be available.
EDUC 3P45
Reading and Literacy Development
Overview of the reading process, acquisition of reading and writing skills and evidence-based instruction. Focus on cognitive, linguistic and sociocultural influences.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 6.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: optional practicum may be available. Students require a current police record check, with a vulnerable sector screening.
*EDUC 3P50
Early Childhood Education I
(also offered as CHYS 3P50)
Early childhood education programs for children from birth to age eight. Topics include the historical and societal influences on early childhood education, program models derived from theories of learning and child development and research on the effectiveness of these programs.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA CHYS majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits and to BECE students until date specified in Registration guide.
EDUC 3P51
Early Childhood Education for Sustainability
Theoretical and foundational concepts and principles of sustainability. Early childhood education's importance in promoting transformative change in curriculum and pedagogy, and movement toward experiential, constructivist and participatory learning and teaching.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students.
EDUC 3P52
Early Childhood Education II
Methods in early childhood education programs for children from birth to age eight. Topics include curricula, instructional strategies and evaluative techniques.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 3P50.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CHYS 3P52.
EDUC 3P53
Ethics, Policies and Care in Early Childhood Education
Diverse perspectives on ethics, policy and care in early childhood education through local and global contexts. Policies that govern ECE practices from a socio-political-cultural perspective.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students.
EDUC 3P54
The Science Behind the Developing Child
Science and theories of early human development and the role of experiences during the prenatal and early childhood periods as key influences on health, education, behaviour and the general well-being of children.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
EDUC 3P55
Young Children with Exceptionalities
Learning and developmental aspects of young children with exceptional needs. Topics may include exceptionalities with social cognition, executive function, learning disabilities, behavioural, sensory, motor/physical challenges, and/or pervasive disabilities.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE and micro-certificate Special Needs in ECE students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
#EDUC 3P60
Gender Issues in Teaching and Learning
(also offered as WGST 3P60)
Theoretical and practical aspects of feminist engagement with pedagogic processes within/against both traditional and alternative educational contexts; examination of levels and components of education from a variety of feminist theoretical perspectives; pedagogic and political consequences of ideology critique and alternative practices.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 6.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
EDUC 3P65
Education for Social Change
Introduction to educational theories and best practices that support social justice. Topics include social activism, sustainability education and inclusive education.
Lecture/seminar, 3 hours per week.
EDUC 3P66
Education for Personal Change
Introduction to educational theories and best practices that support personal change. Topics include positive education, socio-emotional learning and growth mindset.
Lecture/seminar, 3 hours per week.
EDUC 3P70
Schooling, Education and Society
Experience the difference between "being schooled" and "being educated". Impact on society of schooling versus education.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE majors and students with a minimum of 6.0 overall credits.
EDUC 3P90
Directed Studies
Guided reading on a topic chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: permission of the Chair.
Note: consultation is done prior to enrolment. A written agreement is signed by the Chair and filed with the department.
EDUC 3P91
Pedagogy of Indigenous Arts
Diverse representations and expressions of North American Indigenous knowledge systems and cultures through multidisciplinary arts in both local and global contexts.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours))/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors, BECE majors until date specified in Registration guide or to students with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
EDUC 3P97
Supporting Language Learners
Preparation for future educators to understand, work with, and support language learners.
Restriction: pen to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd(Intermediate/Senior) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors and BECE students, until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Note: Note: may be available on-site, online or blended. Students require a current police record check, with a vulnerable sector screening. Students are expected to cover all expenses associated with acquiring the police check.
EDUC 4D50
Early Childhood Education Honours Thesis
Research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty adviser.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 4F50.
EDUC 4F50
Early Childhood Education Honours Thesis
Research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty adviser.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students or permission of the instructor.
EDUC 4P01
Higher Level Thinking in the Sciences and Mathematics
Perspectives on thinking that inform science and mathematics curriculum and teaching including cognitive science, socio-cultural perspectives, and complexity science. Topics include cognitive processes, developmental perspectives on children's thinking, the role of language, tools, and information technology in students' thinking and assessment.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: background in science and/or mathematics required.
EDUC 4P03
Reflection on Practice
Classroom interactions in relation to beliefs, values and pedagogy. Students will plan classroom actions, act, observe their plans in action and reflect on the results before using the experience to replan. The reflective process will include both group interactions and individual responses.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE majors and to students with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
EDUC 4P04
Observation and Evaluation for the Early Years
Assessment of learning (summative), assessment for learning (formative and diagnostic) and assessment as learning (self-assessment). Assessment tasks and tools to enhance student learning and assessment situated in curriculum design.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students until date specified in Registration guide.
EDUC 4P14
Mathematics in the Early Years
Theories of early mathematical understanding and best practices in mathematics education for young children.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students.
EDUC 4P15
Research on Teaching
How educational research has contributed to the development of teaching.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
EDUC 4P17
Integrating Curriculum and Assessment - Primary/Junior
Explores current research and emerging issues related to assessment 'of', 'for' and 'as' learning and their seamless integration into curriculum.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 4P18 and 4P19.
EDUC 4P18
Integrating Curriculum and Assessment - Junior/Intermediate
Explores current research and emerging issues related to assessment 'of', 'for' and 'as' learning and their seamless integration into curriculum.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 4P17 and 4P19.
EDUC 4P19
Foundations of Curriculum and Assessment - Intermediate/Senior
Explores the integration of curriculum and assessment 'of', 'for' and as' learning from philosophical, pedagogical, and historical foundations.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 4P17 and 4P18.
EDUC 4P24
Literacy in the Early Years
Theoretical foundations of early literacies. Focus on multiliteracies, digital literacies, and culturally relevant and responsive literacies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students until date specified in Registration guide.
EDUC 4P27
Twenty-First-Century Literacies Across the Primary/Junior Curriculum
Explores multiliteracy across the curriculum including critical, technological, media and financial literacies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 4P17.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 4P28 and 4P29.
EDUC 4P28
Twenty-First-Century Literacies Across the Junior-Intermediate Curriculum
Explores multiliteracy across the curriculum including critical, technological, media and financial literacies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 4P18.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 4P27 and 4P29.
EDUC 4P29
Twenty-First-Century Literacies Across the Intermediate/Senior Curriculum
Explores multiliteracy across the curriculum including critical, technological, media and financial literacies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): EDUC 4P19.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 4P27 and 4P28.
EDUC 4P35
Global Education: A Cross-Curricular Approach
Theory and practice of teaching from a global perspective within the framework of the Ontario curriculum. New challenges in requiring the values, skills and knowledge necessary to be world-minded citizens capable of linking the local and the global.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE students until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors, and BECE students until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
EDUC 4P36
Global Education: Field Experience
Global issues (i.e., development, culture, gender, ecology, human rights, social justice) from the perspective of individuals within a particular geographical context.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Note: consult the Department prior to registration. Students are expected to cover all their own expenses.
EDUC 4P46
Mental Health and Wellness
Promotion of mental health and wellness health through a variety of theoretical perspectives.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE majors and students with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
EDUC 4P47
Wellness and Resilience for Educators
Current research related to theories, practices and emerging issues related to wellness and resilience in educators, focusing on what it means to be well.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: student must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
EDUC 4P52
Inclusive Programming in Early Childhood Education
Theories and best practices for the education of young children across the disabilities spectrum.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE and micro-certificate Special Needs in ECE students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
*EDUC 4P62
Video Games in the Classroom
(also offered as IASC 4P62)
Research and current issues related to the integration of video games and other interactive new media technologies into the elementary and secondary school instructional program.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd(Intermediate/Senior) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors and BECE students, until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC (IASC) 3P62.
EDUC 4P67
Issues and Trends in Canadian Post-Secondary Education
Examination of the higher/post-secondary education sector in Canada from the colonial period to present day. Issues and trends, including access, financing, research and international competition, are examined from historical, sociological and policy perspectives.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits
EDUC 4P70
Education as a Socio-Political System
Concepts and controversies related to legal, ethical, professional, organizational, political and administrative aspects of education in Canada.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BECE majors or to students with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
EDUC 4P80
Research Methods in Education
Trends in research design, ethics and data analysis.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
EDUCATION SCIENCE COURSE
ESCI 3P91
Science for Elementary School Teachers
Focus on teaching the foundations of the science curriculum at the elementary level (grades 4-8). Selected issues in contemporary science education, as well as the application of computer software in the science classroom.
Lectures, seminar, practicum, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Note: students must have a Police Record Check deemed appropriate by the Faculty of Education.
MASTERS PREPARATION IN EDUCATION COURSES
MPCE 6F02
Canadian Cultural Practices
Acculturation process experienced by international students studying in Canada. Introduction to the academic and social expectations of study-life within Canadian post-secondary programs.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Masters Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended. Cultural enrichment activities include field trips to local landmarks and participation in Canadian cultural celebrations.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MPCE 6P02.
MPCE 6F05
Introduction to Research
Qualitative, quantitative and mixed research methods undertaken for research within Education and related disciplines. Deeper understanding of the nature and processes of research, and skills to critically read, conduct and evaluate research.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Masters Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MPCE 6P05, 6P09 and 6P10.
MPCE 6P00
Introduction to Educational Studies
Introduction to the broad field of education including the field's historical, philosophical, sociological and psychological foundations with a focus on the Canadian context.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Masters Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online, or blended.
MPCE 6P01
Graduate Study Preparation Seminar
Academic and social skills needed to successfully transition to graduate study in Canada. Topics include identifying appropriate graduate programs, securing referees, understanding application protocols, writing statements of intent, and succeeding in interviews.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week; offered in selected weeks over two terms.
Restriction: open to Master Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended. Activities may include attending university open-houses, peer-mentoring and graduate student shadowing.
MPCE 6P03
Critical Pedagogy and Social Justice
Exploration of Paulo Freire, Henry Giroux, bell hooks, and others writing within critical pedagogy as the basis for the connection between 'education' and social justice projects. Topics include oppressive regimes of power/knowledge, indigenous knowledges, and critical pedagogy as a social movement, as revolutionary and transformative.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Master Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
MPCE 6P07
In/Equity, Diversity and Change in Education
Critical understanding of social in/equity through the intersecting discourses of gender, race, class, sexuality, age, ability, and language, and how this discursive matrix frames educational experiences. Institutional and individual strategies developed to re/situate, re/visit, and re/claim the politics of meaning and experience.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Master Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
MPCE 6P08
The Organization of Canadian Higher Education
Post-secondary education work that supports students' development and learning. Topics include knowledge creation, distribution, and maintenance; academic freedom; dissenting opinion; academic integrity; student agency and accountability; the teacher-student dynamic and regulatory structures within higher education. Emphasis on interconnectedness of issues and acculturation for international students.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Master Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
MPCE 6P11
Wellness in Canadian Higher Education
Promotion of wellness and self-care through a variety of theoretical perspectives.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Masters Preparation Certificate in Education students.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
MPCE 6Q96
Experiential Learning in Education
Learning, application, and reflection on educational work and learning in the Canadian educational context. Students connect theory to practice in a workplace setting.
Lectures, discussion, 3 hours per week.
Note: Students are expected to cover all expenses associated with the experiential learning course.
INTERNSHIP COURSES
EDUC 3P85
Internship I
Community or school-based placement. Examining the process and theory of teaching in relation to curriculum development, observation, documentation and evaluation.
Restriction: open to BECE students.
Note: students are responsible for their own transportation and require a current police record check, with a vulnerable sector screening. May be available on-site, online or blended.
EDUC 3P95
Advanced School-Based Internship
School-based field experiences enabling students to explore the Ontario College of Teachers Standards of Practice in relation to a beginning teacher's lived experiences.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
Note: students require a current police record check with a vulnerable sector screening. Students are expected to cover all expenses associated with the internship and to have reliable transportation throughout the Greater Niagara region.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 3P96 and 4P95.
EDUC 3P96
Advanced Community-Based Internship
Field experiences enabling students to explore the work of educators employed in settings outside of traditional schools.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Note: students require a current police record check, with a vulnerable sector screening. Students are expected to cover all expenses associated with the internship and to have reliable transportation throughout the Greater Niagara region. Field experiences exploring the work of educators employed in settings outside the traditional school.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 3P95 or 4P95.
EDUC 4P85
Internship II
Students will be placed in a community or school based placed placement. Developing a foundation for and skills in developmental programming.
Restriction: open to BECE students.
Note: students are responsible for their own transportation and require a current police record check, with a vulnerable sector screening. May be available on-site, online or blended.
EDUC 4P95
International Advanced Internship
School or Community-based field experiences in international settings analysed in relation to transnational pedagogy which may include notions of concentric storying, social justice, human rights, and standards of practice.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits.
Note: complete online application prior to registration. Students are expected to cover all expenses associated with the internship.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in EDUC 3P95 and 3P96.
Administrative Co-ordinator
Teresa Shanley
905-688-5550 extension 3082
Welch Hall 113
brocku.ca/education
Manager-International Programs
Susan Virtue
905-688-5550 extension 6084
Welch Hall 9E
Administrative Assistant
Danielle Larmon
The teaching and research expertise within the Department of Educational Studies covers a wide range of educational topic areas, including early childhood education, elementary education, secondary education, adult education, higher education and non-formal education. The following programs are housed in the department:
Bachelor of Early Childhood Education
Concurrent BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior)
Concurrent BA CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior)
Concurrent BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate)
Concurrent BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate)
Concurrent BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior)
Concurrent BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate)
Concurrent BSc (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior)
Concurrent BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate)
Teacher Education
Continuing Teacher Education
Adult Education
Masters Preparation Certificate in Education
Masters of Education
Joint PhD in Education

39

English Language and Literature
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
CREATIVE WRITING COURSES
#ENCW 1P06
History and Future of Storytelling
(also offered as IASC 1P06 and WRDS 1P06)
History of storytelling from the earliest oral traditions to contemporary forms of digital expression. Storytelling's cultural roots in fairy tales, legends and myths through to film, video games and interactive fiction. Elements of narrative, structure, character, conflict and dramatic arc. Concepts and practices in rhetoric, storyboarding, and presentation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 1P06.
*ENCW 2P72
The Creative Writer
(also offered as ENGL 2P72 and WRDS 2P72)
Introduction to creative writing. Emphasis on practical and critical approaches to forms, elements of craft, and editing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P72.
ENCW 3P06
Creative Writing: Short Fiction
The craft of short fiction writing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd and WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRDS (ENGL) 3P06.
ENCW 3P07
Creative Writing: Poetry
The craft of poetry writing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)BEd and WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRDS (ENGL) 3P07.
ENCW 3P08
Creative Non-Fiction Writing
The craft of creative non-fiction writing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd and WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*ENCW 3P72
The Creative Writer and the Community
(also offered as ENGL 3P72 and WRDS 3P72)
Consideration of the special place that creative writers occupy in their various communities, literary, local and global.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P72.
*ENCW 3P73
Creative Writing for Digital Media
(also offered as ENGL 3P73, IASC 3P73 and WRDS 3P73)
Exploration of new avenues for creative expression opened by digital technologies. Consideration of how digitalization changes such notions as the nature of creativity, genre, audience, authorship and copyright.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), GAMD, IASC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P73.
#ENCW 3P92
Scriptwriting
(also offered as DART 3P92)
Theory and practice of writing with action, character and dialogue.
Seminar, workshop, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to DART (single or combined) and DART (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): DART 1P96 (2P92) or IASC/ENCW/WRDS 1P06 or permission of the Department.
Note: materials fee and field trip fee required. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
ENCW 4P06
Advanced Creative Writing: Short Fiction
Advanced craft of short fiction writing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
ENCW 4P07
Advanced Creative Writing: Poetry
Advanced craft of poetry writing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
ENCW 4P08
Advanced Creative Non-Fiction Writing
Advanced craft of creative non-fiction writing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
ENGLISH COURSES
ENGL 1F91
English Literature: Tradition and Innovation
Works from the medieval to the contemporary period, including such authors as Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, Wordsworth, the Brownings, Woolf and Rushdie. Genres include tragedy, romance, epic, and the novel.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: particular attention will be paid to perceptive reading and clear, effective writing.
ENGL 1F95
Literature in English: Forms, Themes and Approaches
Fiction, poetry, drama and film drawn from the 19th century to the present. The conventions of genre and the ways writers shape their work to produce meaning. Treatment in literature of such themes as the nature of evil; history, gender and civil strife; constructions of love.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: particular attention will be paid to perceptive reading and clear, effective writing. May be offered online.
ENGL 1F97
Literature of Trauma and Recovery
Responses to human suffering, both personal and societal, and the power of words to express and effect change in the face of powerful adversity. Narratives of and responses to illness, violence, death and mourning, war and pestilence, and genocide. Includes works drawn from fiction, poetry and drama.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: particular attention will be paid to perceptive reading and clear, effective writing.
*ENGL 2F62
Contact in Canadian Literature
(also offered as CANA 2F62)
Contact between Indigenous peoples and Settler populations in Canadian literature.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: offered online.
ENGL 2P10
Young People's Literature to 1914
Critical study of fairytales, folk tales, poetry and novels adapted for or directed toward children and young people from the folk-tale heritage to 1914.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P11
Young People's Literature after 1914
Critical study of fairytales, folk tales, poetry and novels written for children and young people during the 20th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P13
Genre Studies
History and characteristics of a particular literary genre such as satire, detective fiction, graphic novels selected by the instructor.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: see Department webpage for details.
*ENGL 2P15
Speculative Fiction
(also offered as IASC 2P15)
Critical study of some of the histories, contexts, genres, and traditions of science fiction and the literature of the fantastic.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P17
The Evolution of the Western
Adaptations of the genre of the Western in literature, film, television, radio, and comics to reflect contemporary politics, forms, and social ideals. Representations of nation, race and gender, and the ways in which this popular form can be used to explore ongoing and new cultural ideas and political issues.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: offered online.
Students will not receive earned credit for ENGL 2P17 if ENGL 2P13 has been successfully completed.
ENGL 2P19
Chaucer
Chaucer's poetry, especially The Canterbury Tales, in relation to late medieval English cultural and social history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
#ENGL 2P20
Identity, Identification and Public Address
(also offered as WRDS 2P20)
Relation between individual and community identity as expressed in public address, history or writing and speaking in the public sphere, and the aesthetic and political constraint on writing as activism, as advocacy and as a participatory practice in local, national and/or transnational publics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P20.
ENGL 2P21
Introduction to Tudor Literature
Topics, genres, cultural contexts and ideologies which informed the imaginative literature in 16th-century England.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, MARS 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P24
Early 17th-Century Literature
Early modern drama, poetry and prose, 1603 to the English Revolution, including such writers as Webster, Donne, Jonson and Lanyer.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, MARS 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P26
Restoration and 18th-Century British Literature and Culture I
Examination of British literature and culture from 1660 to the 1790s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#ENGL 2P28
Persuasive Discourse: Theoretical Foundations
(also offered as IASC 2P28 and WRDS 2P28)
Classical foundations, historical developments and contemporary theory. Relation of language use to cultural practices, ethics, identity and power. Analysis of various genres of texts and persuasive writing in popular culture and mass media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, IASC 1F01 (1F00), COMM 1F90, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P28.
ENGL 2P32
British Romanticism I
Examination of the literature and culture of the Romantic period in Britain from the 1780s to the 1830s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P33
British Victorian Literature and Culture I
Examination of the literature and culture of the Victorian period in Britain from the 1830s to 1901.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or the permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P45
Poetry and Poetics
Construction of a working technical vocabulary for analyzing and discussing poetry, including a variety of poetic styles, authors and periods, as well as a number of critical statements on poetics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P52
Postcolonial Literature
Literatures of resistance and emergence written in English in former British territories, such as those in Africa and the West Indies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P52.
ENGL 2P53
Southern African Literatures of Transition
Literary explorations of and interventions in the political and socio-cultural transitions from white regimes to majority-rule politics. Emphasis on histories of trauma, displacement and dispossession.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P53.
ENGL 2P56
The Short Story
Theory and analysis of the short story from Poe and Hawthorne to contemporary writers.
Lectures, seminars, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P60
American Literature: 1800-1865
Literature of the post-Revolutionary era to the Civil War. Topics include American Romanticism, gender, the literatures of captivity and antislavery, and antebellum meanings of cultural freedom and national selfhood.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*ENGL 2P64
Early Canadian Literature
(also offered as CANA 2P64)
Canadian explorations of cultural conflict and the emergence of the nation from First Contact to Exploration to Settlement.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*ENGL 2P65
Twentieth-Century Canadian Literature
(also offered as CANA 2P65)
Canadian literary response to the radical social and cultural shift of modernism. Topics include war, gender, industrialization and urbanization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*ENGL 2P66
Cultural Conflict in Canadian Literature
(also offered as CANA 2P66)
Writing from the post-centennial explosion and maturation of Canadian literature, including current cutting-edge work. Topics may include postmodernism, multiculturalism, ecocriticism and small press experimentation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P67
American Literature:1865-1910
Prose of the Reconstruction period, the Gilded Age and the Progressive era, emphasizing the growth of the minority literatures and the rise of realism and regional writing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P68
American Literature: 1910-1945
Literature of the early 20th century, emphasizing the various literary and cultural responses to industrialization and world wars, and the rise of modernism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2P69
American Prose from 1945
Topics may include the Cold War, the rise of social movements such as Black Power and Second-Wave Feminism, Vietnam, postmodernism, America and globalization, and expanding the canon of American literatures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*ENGL 2P70
Introduction to Literary Theory
(also offered as IASC 2P70)
Approaches to meaning and interpretation in the contemporary study of literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the instructor.
#ENGL 2P72
The Creative Writer
(also offered as ENCW 2P72 and WRDS 2P72)
Introduction to creative writing. Emphasis on practical and critical approaches to forms, elements or craft, and editing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P72.
ENGL 2P80
Shakespeare 1590-1603
Representative plays from the first half of Shakespeare's dramatic career emphasizing theoretical and cultural issues raised by the plays in the context of fin-de-sicle Elizabethan England.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, MARS 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P80.
ENGL 2P81
Shakespeare 1603-1614
Representative plays from the second half of Shakespeare's dramatic career emphasizing theoretical and cultural issues raised by the plays in the context of the opening decade of James I's culturally divisive reign.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P81.
ENGL 2P82
Shakespeare's Comedies
Representative comedies and tragicomedies emphasizing the variety of Shakespeare's comic modes, from the grotesque to the miraculous, and on theoretical approaches to the comic.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P82.
ENGL 2P83
Shakespeare's Tragedies
Shakespeare's development of tragedy as a genre in the context of early modern aesthetic and cultural concerns. Attention to recent theoretical approaches.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P83.
ENGL 2P84
Non-Shakespearean Drama in England, 1576-1642
Variety of dramatic genres written for the playhouses of early modern London, including plays by Marlowe, Dekker, Jonson, Middleton, Massinger and Ford.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, MARS 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
#ENGL 2P93
Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 2P93, FILM 2P93 and PCUL 2P93)
Analysis of storytelling across different media such as novels, film, television, the Internet and video games.
Lectures, seminar, screening, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN and PCUL majors.
Prerequisite(s): one of one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS 1F90, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL (PCUL/COMM) 2F92.
#ENGL 2P95
Reading the Middle Ages: The Heroic and the Chivalric
(also offered as MARS 2P95)
Heroic and chivalric worlds of Europe and how they shaped medieval society. Selections from Beowulf, Anglo-Saxon heroic literature, Eddic poetry, Old Norse sagas, the lais of Marie de France, Courtly Love and Arthurian-related narrative.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#ENGL 2Q91
Black Women Writing Resistance
(also offered as WGST 2Q91)
Intersections and interconnections of Black Womens writing and Black Feminist/Womanist thought in the African Diasporas. Critical consideration of Black womens art as mobilizing for survival, placing texts in respective historical, social and political contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits
#ENGL 2Q99
Women, Gender and Literature
(also offered as WGST 2Q99)
Feminist perspectives on representations of women, gender and writing, focusing on Western and/or World literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2Q99.
*ENGL 2V20-2V29
Studies in Writing by Women
(also offered as WGST 2V20-2V29)
Selected topics in women's writing.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 2V70-2V79
English Area Studies
Studies in a specialized area of English literature.
Prerequisite(s): one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#ENGL 3P03
Advanced Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 3P03, FILM 3P03 and PCUL 3P03)
Case studies in the adaptation of popular texts across media.
Lectures, seminar, screening, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN and PCUL majors.
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 2P93 (2F92).
#ENGL 3P18
True Stories: The Art and Craft of Literary Journalism
(also offered as WRDS 3P18)
History and theory of narrative non-fiction from Daniel Defoe to Susan Orlean; techniques of narrative craft in the telling of factual stories.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one and one-half ENGL, COMM, PCUL or WRDS (WRIT) credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P18.
ENGL 3P21
Major Tudor Poets and Poetics
Influential works of Philip Sidney, William Shakespeare and Edmund Spenser, and the literary theories that governed their practice. Texts such as Sidney's Defence of Poesy, Shakespeare's sonnets and Spenser's Faerie Queene.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P22
The Literature of Milton's Time
Poetry and prose from the Civil War to the early Restoration period emphasizing Milton.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P26
Restoration and 18th-Century British Literature and Culture II
Advanced studies in British literature and culture from 1660 to the 1790s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#ENGL 3P28
Rhetorical Analysis
(also offered as IASC 3P28 and WRDS 3P28)
Analysis of literary and non-literary texts using categories, insights and practices of classical and contemporary rhetorical studies. Texts include poetry, fiction, drama, journalism, scientific and political writing, and advertising. Attention to the rhetoric of public spaces, issues of social justice, and the building and maintenance of human communities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW(single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits, one WRDS (WRIT) credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P28.
ENGL 3P32
British Romanticism II
Advanced studies in the literature and culture of the Romantic period in Britain from the 1780s to the 1830s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P33
British Victorian Literature and Culture II
Advanced studies in the literature and culture of the Victorian period in Britain from the 1830s to 1901.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P38
Modernism
Modernist writing in English, from its experimental beginnings through its engagement with radical social thought in the 1960s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*ENGL 3P39
Contemporary Literature in English
(also offered as IASC 3P39)
The postmodern period emphasizing the forms, approaches and cultural responses that have characterized writing in English in the later 20th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99, IASC (2P57) and 2P70 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P40
The 18th-Century Novel
The rise of the novel and its development 1700 to 1830 by such writers as Defoe, Richardson, Haywood, Fielding, Goldsmith, Edgeworth, Burney and Austen.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P41
Gothic Writing
The gothic in novels, poetry, drama and non-fiction prose from its beginnings to the turn of the 20th century by such writers as Burke, Radcliffe, Lewis, the Shelleys, the Bronts and Stoker.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P42
The 19th-Century Novel
Emergence of the novel as the pre-eminent literary form emphasizing engagement with social issues of the period and on realism as a means of representing human experience. May include such writers as Dickens, Gaskell, Eliot, Thackeray, Hardy and James.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P43
Gothic Traditions since 1900
The gothic in fiction, non-fiction prose, and popular culture from the turn of the 20th century to the present by such figures as Stoker, Peake, Hitchcock, King, Carter, Rice and Craven.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P44
Writing the Body in 19th-Century Literature
Representations in American and British poetry and fiction. Topics include the diseased body, the racialized body, the gendered body and the eroticized body.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P45
Modern Poetry and Poetics
Poetry of the 20th and 21st centuries emphasizing the relationship between form and ideas in poems that investigate the central aesthetic, intellectual and political concerns of the modern period.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P61
Literary Movements in the United States
Movement or tradition in American literature organized around a school of representation or a cultural tradition such as Hispanic, Asian, African American or Native Literatures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P66
Adapting Canadian Literature
Canadian literature in response to changing 21st-century media environments and other cultural challenges.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#ENGL 3P72
The Creative Writer and the Community
(also offered as ENCW 3P72 and WRDS 3P72)
Consideration of the special place that creative writers occupy in their various communities, literary, local and global.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P72.
#ENGL 3P73
Creative Writing for Digital Media
(also offered as ENCW 3P73, IASC 3P73 and WRDS 3P73)
Exploration of new avenues for creative expression opened by digital technologies. Consideration of how digitalization changes such notions as the nature of creativity, genre, audience, authorship and copyright.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), IASC (single or combined), GAMD majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P73.
*ENGL 3P90
Life Writing
(also offered as WRDS 3P90)
Cultural productions of the self; theories of and approaches to the study of life writing; texts may include memoirs, diaries, autobiographies and biographies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P90.
ENGL 3P94
Literary Criticism
Literary criticism from Aristotle to Brooks and Leavis emphasizing enduring literary critical problems.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 3P94.
ENGL 3P95
Medieval English Literature
Survey of English literature from the Middle Ages. May include such writers as Marie de France, John Gower, Thomas Malory and Margery Kempe, and anonymous tales of Arthurian adventures.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3P97
Feminism and Speculative Fiction
Feminist engagements with the traditions of science fiction and the literature of the fantastic. Authors may include Butler, LeGuin, McKillip, Harroway and Bradley.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or above or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL 3V93.
ENGL 3Q91
Structuralist and Poststructuralist Literary Theory
Development of structuralist and poststructuralist thought from the late 19th century. Includes structuralist theoreticians such as de Saussure, Levi-Strauss and Barthes and poststructuralist theoreticians such as Derrida and Foucault.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL 4P70.
ENGL 3Q92
Cultural Materialism and Literary Theory
Examination of the evolving traditions of Marxian and dissident thought and the study of literature as cultural production within a political economy. Includes readings of such authors as Gramsci, Benjamin and Jameson.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3Q93
Psychoanalysis and Literary Theory
Key concepts and debates in psychoanalysis and their application to the study of literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3Q95
Feminist Theory
Key issues and debates in versions of feminist theory important to the discipline of English. Topics may include gender and knowledge production, gender and colonialist discourses, struggles among competing feminisms, and gender, sexuality, class and race in academe.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3Q96
Queer Theory
Key issues and debates in versions of queer theory important to the discipline of English literary studies. Readings may include Sedgwick, Edelman, Love, Wiegman and Muoz.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3V00-3V10
Topics in Children's Literature
Advanced Studies in writing for children and young people.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or above or permission of the instructor.
*ENGL 3V20-3V29
Advanced Studies in Writing by Women
(also offered as WGST 3V20-3V29)
Selected topics in women's writing at an advanced theoretical and methodological level.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above, WGST 1F90 and one-half-credit from ENGL 2V20 to 2V29 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3V60-3V69
Special Topics in Canadian Literature
ENGL 3V70-3V79
Theoretical Issues in the Study of Literature
ENGL 3V90-3V99
English Area Studies
Studies in a specialized area of literature in English.
ENGL 3V91
2021-2022: Social Justice and Cultural Production
Artistic and theoretical texts of the production and reception of literature, drama and other media that engage issues and advance projects of social justice and equity. How the arts and media are linked to struggles for social justice at local, national and global levels.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 3V97
2021-2022: The Lives of Dogs
Study of canine-centered texts ranging from the eighteenth century to the present in the context of Animal Studies. Writers may include Francis Coventry, Virginia Woolf, J. R. Ackerley, Jack London, and Paul Auster.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): Two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or above or permission of the instructor.
ENGL 4F99
Senior Research Tutorial or Thesis
Either tutorial combined with individual research or a thesis on a specialized topic or major author, of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: the Chair must approve proposals for projects and circulate approved projects to the Department.
*ENGL 4P00
Literature of the English Revolution
(also offered as HIST 4P00)
Writings from the 1640s to the Restoration, including Areopagitica, Eikon Basilike, female prophecy and Agreement of the People, from literary, critical, historical and theoretical perspectives.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
#ENGL 4P01
Sources and Methods of Medieval and Renaissance Studies
(also offered as HIST 4P01 and MARS 4P01)
Exploration of a range of source materials used to address inquiries into Medieval and Renaissance cultural forms and societies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW, ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and MARS majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: students in other disciplines may register with permission of the instructor and Director.
#ENGL 4P03
Applied Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 4P03, FILM 4P03 and PCUL 4P03)
Practical, historical and theoretical approaches to popular narratives.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to Year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): ENGL 3P03.
ENGL 4P04
Christopher Marlowe
Christopher Marlowe's drama and poetry in the context of Elizabethan theatre and culture.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL 4V03.
*ENGL 4P06
Medieval Literature and Social Control
(also offered as MARS 4P06)
Medieval English literature in relation to the management of different populations in Britain in the late Middle Ages. Topics include the English Rising of 1381, punishment systems, sexuality, literacies and class, the disciplining of bodies to conform to etiquette, the regulation of female speech, and colonization and civility.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) and MARS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and Chair.
#ENGL 4P10
Language and Discourse: Theory and Practice
(also offered as COMM 4P10 and WRDS 4P10)
Analysis of the relation between stylistic features and discursive contexts; encoding and enacting of social worlds and relations in text (both literary and non-literary); introduction to the field of discourse studies in general, emphasizing critical discourse analysis.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P10.
#ENGL 4P15
Words on Words: Narratives of Language
(also offered as WRDS 4P15)
Critical history of the study of language from Socrates to Saussure and after. Theories of the nature and origin of language, the relations among reality, language, and thought, including the relationship between linguistic theories and literary representation in several historical periods.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), ALTS, APLI (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, HEAR, MCMN and SPLS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P15.
#ENGL 4P20
Studies in Cultural Rhetoric
(also offered as WRDS 4P20)
How writing shapes and is shaped by the cultural, political, and economic spheres; the intersections between the fields of rhetoric and cultural studies and their contributions to writing production and analysis.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), ALTS, APLI (single or combined), HEAR and SPLS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P20.
ENGL 4P30
Jane Austen
The work of Austen from a variety of critical and theoretical perspectives.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4P36
Victorian Afterlives
Comparison of influential Victorian texts such as Jekyll and Hyde, Dracula and Alice in Wonderland with later reworkings for print, stage and screen. Examination of contemporary revivals of Victorian style in steampunk fiction and artifacts in their cultural context.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL 4V36.
ENGL 4P37
London: Monster City
Growth of London from a Medieval town into a major metropolitan area as reflected in poetry, novels and first-person accounts. Authors include Samuel Pepys, Charles Dickens, Joseph Conrad and Virginia Woolf.
Seminar.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)BEd/(Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL 4V37.
ENGL 4P41
Advanced Studies in Post-Colonial Literature
Advanced studies in literature and theories of resistance and emergence focusing on literary responses to post-conflict conditions.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4P45
James Joyce's Ulysses
Close reading and discussion of Joyce's 1922 novel. Various theoretical perspectives and reading approaches.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4P61
Advanced Studies in American Literature
Individual author(s), movements or particular theoretical, social or cultural issues raised in American literature.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4P64
Contemporary Canadian Literature
21st Century writing by Canadian and Indigenous authors. Consideration of radical, decolonial, avant-garde, and conceptually innovative works to challenge learned associations of Canada.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
*ENGL 4P70
Reading a Renaissance Woman
(also offered as MARS 4P70)
The place of books and reading in the life and culture of Anne Clifford. Readings from personal writings and books in her library including extracts (in English) from Ovid's Metamorphoses, Cervantes' Don Quixote, Castiglione's Courtier, Montaigne's Essays, Chaucer, Spenser, Jonson and Donne.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) and MARS majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL (MARS) 3V92 and 4V70.
ENGL 4P71
Contemporary Theoretical Approaches
Current and emerging theoretical approaches to the study of literature. Includes movements such as new historicism, postcolonial theory, psychoanalytic criticism, queer and gender theory, trauma theory, ecocriticism and posthumanism.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4P72
King Arthur in Literature for Young People
Ways in which the Arthurian legend has been adapted for use in literature for young people focusing on texts from the 20th century in a range of genres.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ENGL 4V72.
ENGL 4P91
Animal Studies and Literature
Literary and cultural representations of animals from the early modern period to the 21st century in the context of Human-Animal Studies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4P98
Senior Tutorial or Research Paper
Either tutorial combined with individual research or a research paper on a specialized topic or major author, of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: the Chair must approve proposals for projects and circulate approved projects to the Department.
ENGL 4P99
Senior Tutorial or Research Paper
Either tutorial combined with individual research or a research paper on a specialized topic or major author, of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: the Chair must approve proposals for projects and circulate approved projects to the Department.
ENGL 4V00-4V09
Topics in English Literature Before 1800
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4V30-4V39
Topics in 19th-Century Literature
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4V40-4V49
Topics in Contemporary Literature
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4V60-4V69
Topics in Contemporary Canadian Writing
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4V70-4V79
Text and Context
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
ENGL 4V90-4V99
English Area Studies
Studies in a specialized area of literature in English.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
WRITING, RHETORIC AND DISCOURSE STUDIES COURSES
WRDS 1F90
Writing, Rhetoric and Discourse Studies: An Introduction
Histories and theories of rhetoric and writing, including such thinkers as the Sophists, Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Richards, Burke, hooks, Foucault, and Butler. Print-based, digital, and multi-modal writing practices in scholarly, professional and community-based scenes of writing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#WRDS 1P06
History and Future of Storytelling
(also offered as ENCW 1P06 and IASC 1P06)
History of storytelling from the earliest oral traditions to contemporary forms of digital expression. Storytelling's cultural roots in fairy tales, legends and myths through to film, video games and interactive fiction. Elements of narrative, structure, character, conflict and dramatic arc. Concepts and practices in rhetoric, storyboarding, and presentation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 1P06.
WRDS 2P12
Technical Communication and Documents
Concepts and techniques for writing technical documents. Various genre-specific rhetorical strategies that inform written work within and outside the university setting.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P12.
*WRDS 2P14
Technical Writing
(also offered as COMM 2P14)
Processes of technical writing and editing. Document design for scientific, corporate and industrial communication. Practical experience in the production of technical documents.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P14.
*WRDS 2P16
Communication for Organizations
(also offered as COMM 2P16)
Theory, strategies and practice of writing for both business and public organizations.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P16.
*WRDS 2P18
Reporting and News Writing for Mass Media
(also offered as COMM 2P18 and PCUL 2P18)
News gathering, writing, and editing for print and electronic media; journalistic style and conventions; interviewing and other information-gathering techniques; editing basics.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WRDS (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors, RWRT and WRDS minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P18.
*WRDS 2P20
Identity, Identification and Public Address
(also offered as ENGL 2P20)
Relation between individual and community identity as expressed in public address, history of writing and speaking in the public sphere, and the aesthetic and political constraints on writing as activism, as advocacy and as a participatory practice in local, national and/or transnational publics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P20.
*WRDS 2P28
Persuasive Discourse: Theoretical Foundations
(also offered as ENGL 2P28 and IASC 2P28)
Classical foundations, historical developments and contemporary theory. Relation of language use to cultural practices, ethics, identity and power. Analysis of various genres of texts and persuasive writing in popular culture and mass media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW(single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P28.
#WRDS 2P63
Communication Design
(also offered as COMM 2P63 and PCUL 2P63)
Communication through imagery and typography, including grid usage, composition, visual hierarchy, content development and scale.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, PCUL 1F92.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P63.
#WRDS 2P72
The Creative Writer
(also offered as ENCW 2P72 and ENGL 2P72)
Introduction to creative writing. Emphasis on practical and critical approaches to forms, elements or craft, and editing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P72.
*WRDS 3P15
Writing for New Media
(also offered as IASC 3P15)
Theory and practice of writing for new online media. May include web sites, blogs, Twitter and other social media.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P15.
WRDS 3P16
Organizational Discourses
Relations between culture, discourse and the writing produced in organizational settings; rhetorics of business, management, law, science and media; the role of writing in the production and maintenance of socio-cultural interests and values.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WRDS (WRIT) 2P14, 2P16, COMM 2P65 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P16.
*WRDS 3P18
True Stories: The Art and Craft of Literary Journalism
(also offered as ENGL 3P18)
History and theory of narrative non-fiction from Daniel Defoe to Susan Orlean; techniques of narrative craft in the telling of factual stories.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one and one-half WRDS (WRIT), COMM, ENGL or PCUL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P18.
*WRDS 3P28
Rhetorical Analysis
(also offered as ENGL 3P28 and IASC 3P28)
Analysis of literary and non-literary texts using categories, insights, and practices of classical and contemporary rhetorical studies. Texts include poetry, fiction, drama, journalism, scientific and political writing, and advertising. Attention to the rhetoric of public spaces, issues of social justice, and the building and maintenance of human communities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and  WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one WRDS (WRIT) credit, two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P28.
#WRDS 3P63
Digital Design and Communication
(also offered as COMM 3P63 and PCUL 3P63)
Introduction to digital design focusing on visual communication by using Adobe software and the Macintosh computer.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WRDS (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors, RWRT and WRDS minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P63.
#WRDS 3P72
The Creative Writer and the Community
(also offered as ENCW 3P72 and ENGL 3P72)
Consideration of the special place that creative writers occupy in their various communities, literary, local and global.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P72.
#WRDS 3P73
Creative Writing for Digital Media
(also offered as ENCW 3P73, ENGL 3P73 and IASC 3P73)
Exploration of new avenues for creative expression opened by digital technologies. Consideration of how digitalization changes such notions as the nature of creativity, genre, audience, authorship and copyright.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), IASC (single or combined), GAMD majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P73.
#WRDS 3P90
Life Writing
(also offered as ENGL 3P90)
Cultural productions of the self; theories of and approaches to the study of life writing; texts may include memoirs, diaries, autobiographies and biographies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P90.
#WRDS 3P98
Reporting Arts and Culture
(also offered as STAC 3P98)
Contexts, genres, conventions and practices of arts journalism in Canada; critical reading of selected texts in arts journalism; practical experience researching and writing arts news, reviews, features, and publicity for print and electronic media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above from WRDS (WRIT), COMM, ENGL, PCUL or permission of the Centre.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P98.
#WRDS 3P99
Interpretive and Critical Writing in the Arts
(also offered as MLLC 3P99, STAC 3P99 and VISA 3P99)
Principles and methodologies for the written presentation and representation of works of art, artists' practice and events within general and specific disciplinary contexts, discourses and frameworks. Examples from across the arts; practice-based projects from real world events and performances. Orientation to specialized publics in print and other media.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance is required; events fees required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P99.
WRDS 3V90-3V99
Topics in Writing and Culture
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3V90-3V99.
WRDS 4F99
Independent Studies in Writing, Rhetoric and Discourse
Research project related to writing chosen by the student in consultation with a faculty member.
Restriction: open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: the Chair must approve proposals for projects and circulate approved projects to the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4F99.
WRDS 4P01
e-portfolio for Rhetoric, Writing and Discourse Studies
Evidence-based reflection on key pieces of written and/or multi-modal work to showcase rhetorical and critical thinking skills acquired in preparation for scholarly, professional, and/or community-based contexts.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the instructor and the Chair.
*WRDS 4P10
Language and Discourse: Theory and Practice
(also offered as COMM 4P10 and ENGL 4P10)
Analysis of the relation between stylistic features and discursive contexts; encoding and enacting of social worlds and relations in text (both literary and non-literary); introduction to the field of discourse studies in general, emphasizing critical discourse analysis.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P10.
*WRDS 4P15
Words on Words: Narratives of Language
(also offered as ENGL 4P15)
Critical history of the study of language from Socrates to Saussure and after. Theories of the nature and origin of language; the relations among reality, language, and thought, including the relationship between linguistic theories and literary representation in several historical periods.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), ALTS, APLI (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, HEAR, MCMN and SPLS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P15.
*WRDS 4P20
Studies in Cultural Rhetoric
(also offered as ENGL 4P20)
How writing shapes and is shaped by the cultural, political, and economic spheres; the intersections between the fields of rhetoric and cultural studies and their contributions to writing production and analysis.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), ALTS, APLI (single or combined), HEAR, SPLS (single or combined) majors, with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P20.
WRDS 4P98
Independent Studies in Writing
Research project related to writing chosen by the student in consultation with a faculty member.
Restriction: open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: the Chair must approve proposals for projects and circulate approved projects to the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P98.
WRDS 4P99
Independent Studies in Writing
Research project related to writing chosen by the student in consultation with a faculty member.
Restriction: open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: the Chair must approve proposals for projects and circulate approved projects to the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4P99.
WRDS 4V90-4V99
Writing Area Studies
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 4V90-4V99.
Administrative Assistant
Liz Keenan
905-688-5550, extension 3469
573A Glenridge 157
brocku.ca/english
The Literature programs in the Department of English Language and Literature focus on an understanding of the traditions, themes and dynamics of imaginative writing in English, within its various historical and cultural contexts. Students choose courses from a broad range of historically-organized courses, courses in literary genres, and courses in the history of language, criticism and theory. The Writing, Rhetoric and Discourse Studies program focuses on the theoretical, creative and practical applications of writing in and for a range of contexts. The Creative Writing program focuses on the craft of key literary genres, as well as the material and social contexts of creative writing. The Department aims in its programs to foster an informed and critical intelligence, a mastery of the best uses of language, and an appreciation for the social and personal centrality of powerful imaginative and expository writing across times and cultures.
The Department offers a BA Honours in English Language and Literature, a BA Honours in English and Creative Writing, a BA Honours in Writing, Rhetoric and Discourse Studies, a three-year program leading to the BA Pass degree in English Language and Literature or Writing, Rhetoric and Discourse Studies, a combined honours degree in English and Creative Writing and another subject, and combined honours and pass degrees in English Language and Literature and another subject or Writing, Rhetoric and Discourse Studies and another subject. Prospective students to the English and Creative Writing program must submit a portfolio in the Winter term of their first year. See Department for further details on portfolio requirements and due dates. In addition, the Department offers courses on academic, creative and professional writing which are available as electives to all Brock students who wish to explore theories of language production and develop their creative and professional writing skills. The Department also offers a Minor in English Language and Literature and a Minor in Writing, Rhetoric and Discourse Studies as well as a Certificate in Rhetoric and Professional Writing.
Seminars (discussion groups) are the rule in all English Language and Literature courses, encouraging students to become active participants in the study of literary texts. Through close attention to essay assignments, students learn to write in convincing and disciplined ways.
The Department of English Language and Literature offers credit for specified Dramatic Literature courses.
Students may register in courses numbered 4(alpha)00 and above only upon admittance to Year 4 studies or with the permission of the instructor and the Chair.

40

Environmental Sustainability
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ENSU 2P01
Introduction to Environmental Sustainability
Concepts and importance of environmental sustainability. Causes for the contemporary state of the environment. Manner in which human actions impact the environment, novel environmental practices and the frontiers of environmental sustainability.
Note: offered online.
ENSU 2P02
Environmental Sustainability in Practice
Introduction to the practice of environmental sustainability in a variety of fields. Topics may include sustainable agriculture, sustainable transportation, ecotourism, green energy, eco-health, corporate social responsibility and the use of geospatial technologies.
Note: offered online.
ENSU 3P90
Contemporary Environmental Issues
Contemporary topics in environment and sustainability.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENSU minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: ENSU 2P01 and 2P02 strongly recommended.
ENSU 3P91
Leadership in Environmental Sustainability Internship
Specific environmental sustainability problems or tasks identified by a community group, organization or agency. Working under the supervision of the group, organization, agency and the Environmental Sustainability Research Centre.
In class, 10 hours; 90 hours internship placement.
Restriction: permission of the Centre.
Prerequisite(s): ENSU 2P01, 2P02 and 3P90.
*ENSU 3P92
Environmental Psychology
(also offered as PSYC 3P92)
Introduction to the field of Environmental Psychology. Theoretical and applied aspects of the discipline, with an emphasis on understanding the human response to todays most pressing environmental challenges. Topics may include history and theory of environmental psychology, psychological and social barriers to change, risk perception, change strategies for pro-environmental behaviour, sustainability education and communication, and research methods.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one of NEUR 2P36 , PSYC 2P20, or PSYC 2P35; PSYC 1F90
ENSU 3P95
Directed Readings
Specialized study in environmental sustainability on an individual basis to examine a significant topic in a students area of concentration.
Restriction: permission of the centre.
Note: ENSU 2P01 and 2P02 strongly recommended.
ENSU 3V90-3V99
Special Topics in Environment and Sustainability
Topic in sustainability science and society that will vary by instructor.
Restriction: open to ENSU minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: ENSU 2P01 and 2P02 strongly recommended.
Co-ordinator, ESRC
Erin Daly
905-688-5550, extension 4532
Theal House
Sustainability, as a dynamic process involving social-ecological systems, presents urgent challenges as well as opportunities for innovation.
Faculty in the Environmental Sustainability Research Centre (ESRC) and those who contribute to the program come from diverse disciplines and units at Brock University. They share a common interest in environmental sustainability. Brock University is an ideal place to study environmental sustainability as it is located in a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve - a site seeking to reconcile social, economic and biophysical challenges confronting societies around the globe.
The Minor in Environmental Sustainability program provides students with an opportunity to study foundational concepts, fields of application and contemporary issues in this field. Recognizing that the pursuit of sustainability requires going beyond traditional disciplinary barriers, the Minor takes a transdisciplinary orientation to encourage connections among ideas and prepare students to engage with a dynamic and complex world.
Application and approval to carry a minor is required. Students wishing to obtain a Minor in Environmental Sustainability must complete and submit the application form available on the ESRC website.
The Environmental Sustainability Research Centre also offers a Micro-certificate in Environmental Sustainability designed for person who already have a degree or do not wish to pursue a degree. The program consists of required courses which introduce students to conceptual and applied aspects of environmental sustainability. Prospective students should consult with the Academic Advisor before beginning a Micro-certficiate program.

41

Film Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
FILM COURSES
FILM 1F94
Introduction to Film Studies
Critical and historical approaches to world cinema. Close analysis of selected films in relation to their cultural contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
#FILM 2F00
New Media Literacy
(also offered as COMM 2F00 and PCUL 2F00)
Practical training in a repertoire of skills and tools essential to functioning in new media environments, and critical analytical training in key issues and theories related to the contemporary information age.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: this course is offered online.
FILM 2F98
Introduction to Digital Film Production
Introduction to the theory and practice of digital film techniques. Critiques of videos and production work.
Workshop, seminar, 3 hours per week; additional production time as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 1F94.
Corequisite(s): FILM 2P90 and 2P91.
Note: enrolment is limited to 20 students. Material fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit in FILM 3F28.
#FILM 2P20
Theories of Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 2P20 and PCUL 2P20)
Theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of various forms of popular culture. Critical and research skills specific to studies in popular culture.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors, DCUL, MEST and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of FILM 1F94, CANA 1F91, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
#FILM 2P21
Canadian Popular Culture
(also offered as CANA 2P21, COMM 2P21 and PCUL 2P21)
Survey of the media in Canada. Studies in the popular arts, referencing the ways that institutions (CBC, NFB) and selected artists identify and express a Canadian cultural imagination.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, CANA, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, CANA, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
*FILM 2P54
Documentary Film
(also offered as COMM 2P54 and SOCI 2P54)
History, theory, aesthetics and cultural implications of documentary film and other visual media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of FILM 1F94, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 2P56
Canadian Cinema
(also offered as COMM 2P56 and PCUL 2P56)
Critical and historical study of Canadian cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of FILM 1F94, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
FILM 2P90
Film History I
History of cinema as a medium, industry and art form from its origins to the Second World War including Hollywood cinema and major international movements.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 1F94.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit in FILM 2F90.
FILM 2P91
Early Film Theory
Major early film theories including formalism, montage and . Application of the theories to selected films.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 1F94 or permission of the Department.
#FILM 2P93
Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 2P93, ENGL 2P93 and PCUL 2P93)
Analysis of storytelling across different media such as novels, film, television, the Internet and video games.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), MCMN, PCUL and WRDS (single and combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one of FILM 1F94, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 2P94
Popular Cinema
(also offered as COMM 2P94 and PCUL 2P94)
Popular cinema as art and institution emphasizing film genres and cultural contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of FILM 1F94, CPCF 1F25, PCUL 1F92.
#FILM 2P95
Latin American and Iberian Film
(also offered as SPAN 2P95)
Iberian and Latin American film representations of nationality, ethnicity, gender, religion, exile/migration and politics. Emphasis on national and transnational cultural and socio-political contexts and on the study of national/regional cinema movements.
Delivered online.
Note: Spanish and Portuguese language films with English subtitles. Given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P95 and SPAN 2P82.
FILM 2P99
Film History II
History of cinema as a medium, industry and art form since the Second World War including Hollywood cinema and major international movements.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 1F94 and 2P90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit in FILM 2F90.
#FILM 2Q96
Art of Activism: Sexuality to Racial Justice
(also offered as COMM 2Q96, PCUL 2Q96, VISA 2Q96 and WGST 2Q96)
Introduction to the ways marginalized and criminalized populations employ the arts of social change. Topics may include feminist activism, migrant rights, defunding the police and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Artists, film makers and activists in Canada will be featured.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
#FILM 3P03
Advanced Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 3P03, ENGL 3P03 and PCUL 3P03)
Case studies in the adaptation of popular texts across media.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), MCMN, PCUL and WRDS (single and combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P93.
#FILM 3P18
Audience Studies
(also offered as COMM 3P18 and PCUL 3P18)
Theoretical and methodological approaches to the understanding of audiences for media and cultural products, including print, sound, film, broadcasting and digital media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P20.
*FILM 3P20
Television Studies
(also offered as COMM 3P20 and PCUL 3P20)
Historical, theoretical and critical approaches to television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL, STAC majors and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 3P21
Canadian Television
(also offered as COMM 3P21 and PCUL 3P21)
Historical, theoretical and critical approaches to Canadian television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL, STAC majors and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 3P20 or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 3P54
Issues in Documentary Film
(also offered as COMM 3P54 and SOCI 3P54)
Advanced studies in selected aspects of documentary film and other related media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P54.
*FILM 3P56
Issues in Canadian Cinema
(also offered as COMM 3P56)
Advanced studies in selected aspects of Canadian cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P56.
FILM 3P91
Contemporary Film Theory
Current film theories including semiotics, psychoanalysis and postmodernism. Application of the theories to selected films.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P91.
FILM 3P93
Authorship in the Cinema
Historical, theoretical and critical approaches to the study of authorship conducted through close analysis of the style, themes and development of selected film makers, their collaborators and their contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 3P94
Film Genre
(also offered as COMM 3P94 and PCUL 3P94)
Genre theory, its history, development and application to cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P20, 2P21 and 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
FILM 3P95
National Cinema
Study of selected national cinemas emphasizing their relationship to national cultural traditions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
#FILM 3P96
Issues in Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P96 and PCUL 3P96)
Specialized studies in popular culture and its role in specific social, historical or theoretical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P20 and 2P21, or FILM 2P90 (2F90).
*FILM 3P97
Gender and Cinema to the 1960s
(also offered as COMM 3P97, PCUL 3P97 and WGST 3P97)
Representation of gender, sexuality, race and class, and implications of spectatorship and ideology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of FILM 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90), one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 3P98
Gender and Contemporary Cinema
(also offered as COMM 3P98, PCUL 3P98 and WGST 3P98)
Representation of gender, sexuality, race and class via ideology, feminism, queer theory, and spectatorship in film and video texts since the 1960s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of FILM 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90), one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 3Q94
Television Genres
(also offered as COMM 3Q94 and PCUL 3Q94)
Genre theory and its application to popular television.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P20, 2P21 and 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 3R90
Sound & Vision: The Rockumentary
(also offered as COMM 3R90 and PCUL 3R90)
Intersection of the music and film industries through an in-depth study of the popular music documentary (rockumentary), its history and its contexts.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 1F94 and one of FILM 2P20, 2P54, PCUL 2P70.
FILM 3V50-3V59
Special Topics in Film Studies
Topics selected on basis of instructional expertise and student interest
Lectures, screening, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P90 and 2P91 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
FILM 3V90-3V99
Advanced Topics in Film Studies
Topics selected on the basis of instructional expertise and student interest.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
#FILM 3V90
2021-2022: The Superhero in American Culture
(also offered as COMM 3V90 and PCUL 3V90)
The superhero as a cultural symbol. Topics include historical contexts, theories of genre and issues of representation. Examples drawn from comic books, cartoons, television shows and films from the mid-1930s to the present.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 5 hours per week.
FILM 4F80
Directed Reading
Directed individual or group reading in an area of Film Studies.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 80 percent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member, in consultation with the Academic Adviser and must submit a written proposal before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's FILM 4F99 thesis.
FILM 4F99
Honours Thesis
Thesis on a topic of mutual interest to the student and the instructor, with a critical, historical or contemporary focus.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 80 percent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 4P30 and 4P31 (may be taken concurrently).
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member, in consultation with the Academic Adviser and must submit a written proposal before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's FILM 4F80 directed reading.
#FILM 4P03
Applied Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 4P03, ENGL 4P03 and PCUL 4P03)
Practical, historical and theoretical approaches to popular narratives.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), MCMN, PCUL and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): FILM 3P03.
#FILM 4P06
Advanced Studies in Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 4P06 and PCUL 4P06)
Issues in popular culture and its role in specific social, historical and theoretical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Restriction: open to FILM majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 3P96
*FILM 4P28
Special Topics in Video Production
(also offered as COMM 4P28)
Theory, practice and technique of filmmaking, focusing on idea development, creative process and methods of production.
Workshop, seminar, 3 hours per week; additional production time as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): three FILM credits.
Note: enrolment limited to 15 students. Material fee required.
#FILM 4P30
Theories of Mass Culture
(also offered as COMM 4P30 and PCUL 4P30)
Studies in cultural theory and its application to mass media texts, referencing the work of the Frankfurt School, French Structuralism and British Cultural Studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL majors, DCUL, MEST and PCUL minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 4P31
Theories of the Visible
(also offered as COMM 4P31 and PCUL 4P31)
Central 20th-century developments in the theories of visibility and their relevance to the field of media studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#FILM 4P34
Taste and Cultural Politics
(also offered as COMM 4P34 and PCUL 4P34)
Application of cultural theories to the analysis of taste, distinction, class, cultural standards and moral panics, transgression and trash culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
*FILM 4P58
Ecocinema: History, Theory and Practice
(also offered as COMM 4P58 and PCUL 4P58)
Topics may include climate change, species degradation/extinction, resource extraction and other industrial practices (including hydrocarbonized film industrial practices), forced migration, slow violence and eco-trauma, as well as questions of scale, magnitude and the sublime in nature.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hour per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Note: completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FILM (COMM/PCUL) 4V58.
*FILM 4P59
Writing Cultural Criticism for the Media
(also offered as COMM 4P59 and PCUL 4P59)
Skills and techniques for reviewing contemporary media culture for publication.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Note: weekly writing assignments discussed in a workshop context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FILM (COMM/PCUL) 4V59.
*FILM 4P61
Conventions of Screen Realism
(also offered as COMM 4P61 and PCUL 4P61)
How representation and perception of reality have evolved with technology and aesthetics, from the Lumires to reality television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
FILM 4P80
Directed Reading
Directed individual or group readings in an area of Film Studies.
Restriction: open to FILM majors with a minimum of 14.0 credits, a minimum of 75 per cent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member, in consultation with the Academic Adviser and must submit a written proposal, signed by the Undergraduate Program Adviser before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's FILM 4F99 thesis.
FILM 4V50-4V59
Special Topics in Film Studies
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
#FILM 4V57
2021-2022: Visual Culture
(also offered as COMM 4V57 and PCUL 4V57)
Survey of selected practices and phenomena related to the visuality in media and culture. Primary focus is on the role of visuality in the production of knowledge and power relations. Topics may include: scientific visualization, themed environments, photographic cultures, museums, and cartography.
Lecture, Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
FILM 4V60-4V69
Issues in Film History
Specialized studies in Film History addressing issues such as aesthetics, ideological and theoretical concerns across a range of periods and cultures.
FILM 4V70-4V79
Issues in International Cinema
Specialized studies of the historical and social contexts influencing trends and developments in international cinema.
FILM PRODUCTION COURSES
FLIC 2F00
Screenwriting: Writing for Movies
Turning a story idea into a short film screen play, moving from outline, through treatment, first and final draft.
Restriction: open to Film Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered offsite.
FLIC 2F01
Directing/Cinematography: Shaping the Vision
Introduction to the different roles of directors and the methods that transform script to performance. Familiarization with camera and lighting equipment. Technical, aesthetic and logistical considerations for scene shooting in both documentary and dramatic films.
Restriction: open to Film Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered offsite.
FLIC 2F02
Editing and Soundtrack (Composing): Post-Production
Development of skills for giving structure, form, rhythm, and pace to a film to tell a compelling story. Relation between sound and music. Sounds power to convey information and mood as part of storytelling.
Restriction: open to Film Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered offsite.
FLIC 2F03
Television Structure: Genres and Forms
Structures of different television genres and the different requirements of each form: sitcoms, drama, drama series, documentary, movie of the week (MOW) and feature films.
Restriction: open to Television Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered off-site.
FLIC 2F04
Television Series Scriptwriting
Fundamentals of writing scripts for an episodic television series.
Restriction: open to Television Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered off-site.
FLIC 2F05
Directing for Television
Technical and creative areas of the directors and the directing units role during preproduction, production and post-production. Collaborative nature of film making with a show runner and the key crew.
Restriction: open to Television Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered off-site.
FLIC 3F00
Pre-Production and Production: Making a Motion Picture
Step by step understanding of the film-making process. Understanding the various roles involved in film production through the completion of a short film.
Restriction: open to Film Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered offsite. Students will assume different roles on a production.
FLIC 3F01
Producing and Marketing: The Business of Film
Preparation of budgets, marketing and distribution plans and other facets of film promotion. Consideration of varied media markets and venues, contract negotiation, talent booking, and financing.
Restriction: open to Film Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered offsite.
FLIC 3F02
Television Production Process
Project development, planning, budgeting, pre-production, production, post-production, marketing and distribution of a television series.
Restriction: open to Television Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered off-site.
FLIC 3F03
Television Post-production: Editing and Composing
Editing to give structure, form, rhythm and pace to a limited series. Relation between sound and music in a television series.
Restriction: open to Television Production students and permission of the Department.
Note: offered off-site.
INTERNSHIP COURSES
FILM 4F00
Internship in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 160 hour placement.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement experience within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FILM 4P00, 4P01, COMM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, PCUL 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
FILM 4P00
Placement in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 80 hour placement.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FILM 4F00, COMM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, PCUL 4F00, 4P00, 4P01.
FILM 4P01
Placement in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 80 hour placement.
Restriction: open to FILM (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 4P00.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FILM 4F00, COMM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, PCUL 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
Administrative Assistant
TBA
905-688-5550, extension 4290
Scotiabank Hall 309
brocku.ca/cpcf
The Department of Communication, Popular Culture and Film offers four separate programs of study: Business Communication, Media and Communication Studies, Film Studies and Popular Culture. A four-year program leading to the BA Honours degree, a 4 Year BA with Major, and a three-year program leading to the BA Pass degree is offered in all four programs. In addition, the Department is involved in programs with community colleges which offer students the opportunity to earn a degree in Film Studies and a college diploma or certificate.
Film Studies is a sequence of critical and historical courses that examines a variety of approaches to film. The courses explore the nature of film language and develop an analytical perspective on film as both an art and a medium. Other courses explore issues and theories in popular culture. Students may have opportunities to engage in media production in selected upper year courses.
Advanced Film Making, Broadcast Journalism-Television News, and Visual Effects and Editing for Contemporary Media Fanshawe College
Communication, Popular Culture and Film provides three optional programs for Brock Film Majors. Students who successfully complete any of these four year programs will be granted both a Bachelor of Arts with Major Film Studies degree from Brock and an advanced post-graduate certificate from Fanshawe College. Graduates of these programs will have both a strong academic background from Brock along with applied knowledge and training from Fanshawe. Applicants must complete Year 1 at Brock with a minimum 70 per cent major average and minimum 70 per cent overall average to be considered for admission to the Brock Fanshawe programs and must have no more than 8.0 overall credits, at least 4.0 of which must be earned at Brock. Successful applicants must maintain a minimum 70 per cent major and overall average during all three years of the Brock program. Enrolment in this program is limited. Admission is not guaranteed by attainment of the minimum requirements. Application forms and further details concerning the Advanced Film Making, Broadcast Journalism-Television News, and Visual Effects and Editing for Contemporary Media program are available at brocku.ca/social-sciences/collaborative-programs

42

Forensic Psychology and Criminal Justice 
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
FPAC 3P01
Transdisciplinary Study of Aggression, and Crime
Multiple approaches to the study of crime and aggression. Emphasis on breadth and integration of theoretical approaches and methodologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FPAC majors.
FPAC 3P10
Qualitative Research Methods
Methodologies, procedures, and analytic techniques for the study of crime and aggression.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FPAC majors with a minimum 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CHYS 2P51
FPAC 3P15
Advanced Quantitative Statistics
Data screening and descriptive statistics, univariate procedures for correlation and group comparison, multiple regression, data assumptions and statistical software application, including data management and interpretation of results.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FPAC majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2F23
FPAC 3P91
Youth, Mental Health, and the Law
Law surrounding mental disorders in youth (including fitness to stand trial, criminal responsibility and diversion) with attention to the role of mental illness and responses of the criminal justice system.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), CHLHmajors and CHYS minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHYS (single orcombined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), CHLH, GHUM, SOSC majors and CHYS minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
FPAC 4F92
Practicum
Supervised practice in an appropriate community organization, which may include law enforcement,mental health, or other relevant agencies.
Practicum, 10 hours per week for 8 weeks; seminar, 3 hours per week for 2 weeks.
Restriction: open to FPAC majors with permission of the Program Director.
FPAC 4F95
Honours Thesis
Individual study and research with a faculty supervisor and bi-weekly seminar.
Restriction: open to FPAC majors with a minimum 80 percent major average, and an achieved grade of 75 percent in FPAC 3P15 or FPAC 3P10. Students must have a topic approved by the Program Director and a faculty supervisor prior to registration.
Note: topics may come from any field in the discipline and may involve library research, field work and empirical analysis.
Year 1
PSYC 1F90
CHYS 1F90
one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 (see program note 4)
one Humanities context credit
one Sciences context credit
Year 2
PSYC 2F23 and 2P15
one-half credit from PSYC 2P25, 2P30, 2P35
CHYS 2P38 and CHYS 2P51
POLI 2F12
one elective credit (see program note 5)
Year 3
FPAC 3P01
PSYC 3P53
POLI 3P18
CHYS 3P39
FPAC 3P10 and 3P15
two elective credits
Year 4
Depending upon the major average and other departmental requirements, students may select one of three options:
Individual Thesis option:
FPAC 4F95
PSYC 4P72
one-half credit from PSYC 3P32, 4P27, 4P71
one-half credit from POLI 4P01, 4P19, 4P34
one-half credit from CHYS 3Q91, FPAC 3P91
two elective credits-based
Course-Based option:
PSYC 4P72
one-half credit from PSYC 3P32, 4P27, 4P71, POLI 4P01, 4P19, 4P34 (see program note 5)
one credit from PSYC 3P32, 4P27, 4P71, POLI 4P01, 4P19, 4P34, CHYS 3Q91, FPAC 3P91 (see program note 5)
one credit numbered 3(alpha)90 or above (see program note 6)
Practicum option:
FPAC 4F92
PSYC 4P72
one-half credit from PSYC 3P32, 4P27, 4P71, POLI 4P01, 4P19, 4P34 (see program note 5)
one credit from PSYC 3P32, 4P27, 4P71, POLI 4P01, 4P19, 4P34, CHYS 3Q91, FPAC 3P91 (see program note 5)
two elective credits

43

French Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
FREN 1F00
French I
Basic grammar; acquisition of fundamental reading, writing, oral expression and comprehension skills.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: for students with limited or no background in French. Students with Ontario grade 10, 11, 4U/M French or equivalent, may not take this course.
FREN 1F50
French II
Grammar study; development of reading, writing, oral expression and comprehension skills.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): Ontario Grade 10 French, Grade 11 French, FREN 1F00 or permission of the course co-ordinator.
Note: students with 4U/M French or equivalent may not take this course.
FREN 1F90
French III
Grammar review; literary, cultural and journalistic readings; practice in reading, writing, oral expression and comprehension.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; 1 hour oral practice per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of FREN 1F50, 4U/M French, Franais, French immersion or equivalent or permission of the course co-ordinator.
Note: students must obtain a minimum 65 percent in FREN 1F90 in order to enroll in Year 2 French courses. Not open to Francophones (first language is French and attended a Francophone school) who obtained a minimum of 75 percent in Grade 12 French.
FREN 1P93
French Grammar Review and Practice
Grammar review and practice at the French III Level.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Corequisite(s): FREN 1F90.
Note: Not open to students with a minimum 72 percent in FREN 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 1Y91 and 1Y92.
FREN 2F00
Grammar and Composition
Intensive grammar review; literary expression; composition; critical written and oral expression.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; 1 hour oral practice per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 1F90 (minimum 65 percent).
FREN 2F03
Literature and Culture: The French-Speaking World
Literature from 1800 to the present in its cultural contexts. Works from different genres, historical periods and cultural traditions. Dissertation, technical vocabulary, rhetorical terminology and interpretative concepts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 1F90 (minimum 65 percent).
Corequisite(s): FREN 2F00.
Note: students may not concurrently register in FREN 2F03 and any French literature and culture course numbered 3(alpha)00 or above.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in any French literature course numbered 3(alpha)00 or above.
FREN 2P10
Introduction to the Linguistic Study of French
Basic concepts of linguistics through analysis of contemporary French as it is spoken and written throughout the francophone world. Topics may include phonetics, phonology, morphology, lexicology, syntax and semantics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 1F90 (minimum 65 percent).
FREN 2P44
Children's Literature in French: The Picture Book and Beyond
Selection of texts representative of a variety of genres, including the picture book, fairytale, short story and novel emphasizing the contemporary period. Theory of children's literature. Picture books from France and other francophone regions emphasizing the contemporary period; theory of the picture book and its use in the classroom.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Corequisite(s): FREN 2F00.
FREN 2P55
Francophone Cultures and Civilizations
Ideological, historical and cultural aspects of Francophone societies. Topics may include colonialism, issues in language, literature, the arts and gender.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Corequisite(s): FREN 2F00.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 2P95.
FREN 2P57
Phonetics and Phonology
Sound patterns of French. Articulatory, auditory and acoustic properties of human speech. Phonemic and non-phonemic (stress, intonation, rhythm) features.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 1F90 (minimum 65 percent).
FREN 2P65
Culture and Civilization of France to 1800
Art, music, architecture and aesthetics to 1800; intellectual trends; history, politics and society.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Corequisite(s): FREN 2F00.
FREN 3P03
Composition and Stylistics
Advanced grammar and stylistics of contemporary French. Applications to composition.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
FREN 3P05
Business French I
Development of oral and written skills for use of French in business transactions and communications. Developing business vocabulary, focusing on correspondence formulae and terminology.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 or permission of instructor.
FREN 3P06
Translation I
Introduction to fundamental concepts and techniques of translation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 3P03 or permission of instructor.
Note: practice in French-to-English translation.
FREN 3P20
Oral French Workshop
Lexicon (vocabulary), fluency, style, listening skills, comprehension and production.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 or permission of instructor.
Note: class discussions and oral presentations based on themes of contemporary concerns. Multimedia tools will be used. Not open to native speakers of French.
FREN 3P21
Seventeenth/Eighteenth-Century French Literature
Baroque, Classicism and Sicle des Lumires. Authors may include Corneille, Molire, Racine, Mme de La Fayette, Montesquieu, Marivaux, Voltaire and Rousseau.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 3P81, 3P82, 3P91 and 3P92.
FREN 3P42
Nineteenth-Century French Literature
Romanticism, Realism, Naturalism and other currents. Texts chosen from various genres. Authors may include Stendhal, Musset, Balzac, Hugo, Baudelaire, Zola and Rachilde.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 3P45 and 4P44.
FREN 3P53
Twentieth-Century French Literature to 1935
Ideological and aesthetic perspectives. Texts chosen from various genres. Authors may include Proust, Gide, Claudel, Apollinaire, Breton.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
FREN 3P65
Culture and Civilization of France from 1800 to the Present
Art, music, architecture and aesthetics from the 19th century to the present.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
FREN 3P75
Canadian Literature in French up to the Rvolution tranquille
Analysis of major texts chosen from various genres. Historical, sociological and ideological perspectives.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and FREN 2F03
Note: Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 3P73 and/or FREN 3P74.
FREN 3P90
Sociolinguistics of Francophone World
Introduction to sociolinguistic theories and approaches. Application to sociocultural contexts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2P10.
FREN 3P94
Caribbean Literature in French
French-language literary works of the Caribbean. Historical, cultural, ideological and theoretical concerns. Authors may include Maryse Cond. Ren Depestre, Patrick Chamoiseau.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 3P84.
FREN 3P95
French Literature and Culture in Film
New Wave and popular cinema; adaptations of French novels; critical texts. Directors may include Godard, Truffaut, Resnais, Rohmer, Wargnier, Chabrol, Berri, Duras.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 3P85.
FREN 3P96
Critical Theory and Methodology
Approaches to literary criticism: sociological, phenomenological, psychoanalytic approaches; structuralism, semiotics, narratology, deconstruction, bibliographical research.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 4P96.
FREN 3P99
Contemporary Canadian Theatre in French
Background and traditions; analysis of selected plays and study of current directions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 3P89.
FREN 3Q90
Postcolonial (North) African Literature in French
French-language postcolonial literary works of (North) Africa by Francophone writers from the region. Historical, cultural, ideological and theoretical concerns. Authors may include Assia Djebar, Ahmadou Kourouma, Albert Memmi and Aminata Sow Fall.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 3P83, 3P87, 3P93 and 3P97.
FREN 3Q91
Medieval French Literature
Texts chosen from various genres such as chanson de geste, roman, lai, fabliau, canso, ballade, jeu. Notion of authorship. Introduction to Old French.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and 2F03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 4P12.
FREN 4P03
Linguistic Approach to Textual Analysis
Syntax and semantics of French; theoretical applications to textual analysis of literary genres.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to FREN majors with a minimum 70 percent major average (see program note 9), FREN minors with a minimum 70 percent minor average or permission of instructor. Priority will be given to 4th-year French Majors.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03, 3P03 and one-half credit (taught in French) in literature numbered 3(alpha)00 or above.
FREN 4P04
Translation II: Applications
Lexical, morphological, syntactic and semantic interrelationships between source text and target text; application of translation methodologies to a variety of texts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 3P03 and 3P06 or permission of instructor.
FREN 4P05
French Internship
Internship in a business where French is used. May include health care, tourism, translation, community services and business.
Tutorial, 1 hour per week plus internship placement time.
Restriction: open to FREN (single or combined) majors with a minimum 78 percent major average and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 3P03 and 3P05.
Note: enrolment will be limited to the number of placements available. Students will be interviewed in French in order to determine suitability and appropriate placements. Students will be placed in the community for experiential learning.
FREN 4P07
Business French II
Advanced French oral and written skills for business. Includes professionalization-based modules, analyses of specific industry sectors, and experiential projects.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F00 and FREN 3P05 or permission of instructor.
FREN 4P20
Sixteenth-Century Literature
Humanism within the French Renaissance. Notions of imitation and subjectivity. Authors may include Rabelais, Du Bellay, Ronsard, Marguerite de Navarre, Montaigne.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
FREN 4P40
Nineteenth-Century French Society
Thematic approaches to dominant and marginal societies in nineteenth-century France. Topics may include material and popular cultures, fashion and luxury, prostitution, dandyism, and poverty.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
FREN 4P55
Twentieth-Century French Literature from 1935 to 1970
Ideological and aesthetic perspectives. Texts chosen from various genres. Authors may include Malraux, Camus, Sartre, Giraudoux, Robbe-Grillet, Beckett, Char.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
FREN 4P56
French Literature after 1970
Contemporary aesthetic movements. Texts chosen from various genres. Authors may include Le Clzio, Yourcenar, Tournier, Bonnefoy, Modiano, Duras.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
FREN 4P65
(Im)Migrant Identity in Bande Dessine
Depiction of the im/migrant experience in contemporary Francophone bande dessine. Ideological, theoretical and aesthetic aspects. May include Yvan Alagb, Clment Baloup, Farid Boudjellal, Thierry Groensteen, Scott McCloud and Marjane Satrapi.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in FREN 4V65.
FREN 4P75
Canadian Literature in French after 1960
Texts from various genres representing major aesthetic movements.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
FREN 4P79
Text and Image in Literature in French
Contemporary literary texts that include photographs. Theoretical and aesthetic aspects. May include Roland Barthes, Nicole Brossard, Sophie Calle, Annie Ernaux and Michel Tournier.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one half-credit (taught in French) in literature.
FREN 4P80
Beur Literature and Film
Beur phenomenon in France via novels and film. Historical, cultural, ideological and theoretical concerns. Authors may include Azouz Begag, Nina Bouraoui, Mehdi Charef, Soraya Nini and Lela Sebbar.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03, two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
FREN 4P92
Research Project
Independent research project under the supervision of a faculty member.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
FREN 4V20-4V29
Special Topics in French Studies
Special Topics in French Studies
FREN 4V21
2021-2022: Documentation and Terminology
Terminological research methods that help translators and scholars find and process information. Term and field-specific research. Use of terminological databases.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 3P03 and 3P06 or permission of instructor.
FREN 4V60-4V99
Special Research Topics in French Literature
Course content will vary, depending upon the research and interests of instructors.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FREN 2F03; two FREN or MLLC credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above, with at least one-half credit (taught in French) in literature.
Administrative Assistant
Violetta Clitheroe
905-688-5550, extension 3312
Glenridge 573A, Room 263
brocku.ca/modernlanguages
The Department aims to provide students with a thorough and comprehensive knowledge of spoken and written French, as well as French and Francophone literatures and cultures. In addition to the courses taught in French, the Department offers a series of courses taught in English (designated MLLC) that may be acceptable for credit toward a degree in French Studies.
The Department favours and facilitates participation by students of French at all levels in Spring/Summer French immersion programs offered in France and Qubec.
The Department does not recognize challenge for credit nor on-line or distance education courses offered by other institutions.

44

Game
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
BTGD 1P10
Digital Graphics for Gaming I
Introduction to Computer Graphic Imaging and Visual Design within the Adobe workflow. Geared specifically the Gaming, Animation and Illustration Industries with Photoshop in conjunction with a Wacom tablet. Art and Design fundamentals such as Color, Composition, Line weight, Form, and Perspective, producing original artwork, layouts, concepts, roughs and compositions consistent with the expectations of the gaming industry.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9810.
BTGD 1P11
Fundamental 3D and Multimedia Technologies
Introduction to the fundamentals of 3D animation for markets such as games, architecture, visualization and web using industry software. Topics include the navigation of software interface, low and high poly 3D modelling, creating materials, lighting and rendering, key framing and path animation.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9811.
BTGD 1P20
Digital Graphics for Gaming II
Development of knowledge in Computer Graphic Imaging and Visual Design. Foundation of traditional Design and Illustration theory that was applied to the Adobe Photoshop work flow in Digital Graphics for Gaming I. Growing and expanding capabilities as artists through other industry leading software packages. Transferring previously learned processes from Photoshop to vector based production in Illustrator. Applying painting and sculpting fundamentals to 3dimensional meshes in Mudbox. Production of concept art and game assets for a number of industry related projects. Placing the created digital graphics and models into the Unity 3D game engine.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 1P10.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9820.
BTGD 1P22
Game Engine Fundamentals
Fundamental skills for the development of a 2D game. Many industry techniques in the areas of graphic production, animation, and interactive scripting, and how they relate in a production pipeline utilizing a game engine. Development of a set of core skills that can be applied to other engines and production environments. Learning tools for this course may include the Adobe suite, Unity game engine and C# gaming scripts.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 1P11.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9822.
BTGD 2P31
Environment Design
Development of skills necessary for designing and building expansive 3D game environments. Combination of traditional level and map development theory with the design and graphic techniques required to bring them to life in a modern game engine. Industry leading techniques and software for generating terrains, architectural structures and the props and vegetation needed to populate them. Texturing, lighting and particle techniques that are available for enhancing the atmosphere and game play experience from a first person point of view. Mechanical animation techniques, sound effects, and the production ofGUI elements and will utilize software such as Unity Pro, 3DS max, Mudbox, Photoshop and audio editing software.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 1P22.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9831.
BTGD 2P33
Database Essentials
In-depth instruction on relational database design strategies as well as fundamental Structured Query Language (SQL) syntax needed for todays work environment. Design, create and maintain a relational database.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9833.
BTGD 2P35
Game Design and Development I
Aspects utilizing a game engine in conjunction with scripting. Design elements of various game genres, emphasizing using the game engine to further the students understanding of game design techniques. Scripting, and graphics concepts are practiced in this WYSIWYG environment. Use of game development environment to complete several micro-game projects.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 1P22.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9835.
BTGD 2P41
Character Modelling and Animation
Taking a character from sketch to game engine. Leading modelling, lighting, and texturing techniques from the gaming industry as well as many advanced skills desired in the film, architectural and pre-visualization fields. Low and hi poly modelling techniques, the application of texture maps, and methods of rigging, binding and animating characters. Fully realized character coming to life in the Unity game engine. Software packages include Unity, 3DS max, Mudbox, Photoshop and Motionbuilder.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 1P20 and 2P31.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9841.
BTGD 2P44
Project Management
Conducting team based project work in an effective and professional manner. General project management skills within a variety of contexts: client relationship and communications management, team and leadership development, product and service quality promotion, time management, and project documentation. Centered on a common class project and/or case studies.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors and permission of the Program Director.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9844.
BTGD 2P45
Game Design and Development II
Placement in mini teams to collectively build on their previous game development skills. Teams will add more advanced animations, particle effects, and lighting techniques to realize a higher level of realism. Engagement of player game experiences by managing input devices, animated models, game mechanics, terrain influences and audio sound effects.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors and permission of the Program Director.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 2P31 and 2P35.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9845.
BTGD 3P64
The Game Industry Business
Comprehensive understanding of the computer/video gaming business and how to successfully market themselves within it. Topics include the business environment, planning and organizing a software development/gaming business, preparing a business plan, funding approaches, development contracts, hardware/software procurement, techniques involved in producing game marketing trailers, developing online companies, and the preparation and marketing of digital portfolios.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors and permission of the Program Director.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 3Y55.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9864.
BTGD 3P65
Game Production II
Transformation of proposed game project, developed in Game Production I , into reality. Engagement in full video game production activities. Demonstration of functionality requirements at regular intervals throughout the course utilizing presentations, walkthroughs and playable demos resulting in a cohesive, polished and fully functional game.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors and permission of the Program Director.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 3Y55.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9865.
BTGD 3P66
Graphics Programming Fundamentals
Establishment of a fundamental understanding of video game graphics programming through both two and three dimension space. Introduction to standard graphics techniques such as: texture and sprite manipulation, transformations, scaling, rotations, 3D rendering and texture mapping. Standard computer graphics API will be used for programming assignments.
Restriction: open to GAMP majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 3Y56.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9866.
BTGD 3Y51
Advanced Animation Techniques
Foundation of 3D animation and rigging by exploring the science of motion and its application. Analysis of numerous methods for creating real world motions relevant to characters and mechanical devices. Production of strong gestures, poses, solid acting, and planning of effective animation. Skills required for working in a team environment.
6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 2P41.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9851.
BTGD 3Y55
Game Production I
Students will be assigned to a game development production team. Student teams will work closely to conceive, design, document and prototype a new game concept. Result of term work will be a fully realized and documented game design, accompanied with relevant prototypes and a detailed production schedule. Student teams will move to production in the Game Production II course.
3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors and permission of the Program Director.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 2P44 and 2P45.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9855.
BTGD 3Y56
Advanced Game Programming Techniques
Understanding of programming through the implementation of advanced programming methods employed in video game production. Various data structures used to organize and manage game world information and implemented in gaming solutions. Designing and implementation of intelligent systems to solve problems in game applications.
6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMP majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 2P45.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9856.
BTGD 4P76
Network Game Programming
Some of the most powerful features of computer use are the ability to access network resources and communicate with others. Opportunity to implement cabled and wireless computer networks through the installation and configuration of connection devices, communications protocols, peer and client/server services, and additional web and server services supporting networked gaming environments.
Restriction: open to GAMP majors.
Prerequisite(s): BTGD 3P66.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9876.
BTGD 4P77
Mobile Game Development
Mix of important conceptual knowledge and practical programming skills for developing mobile device applications. Key goal is to make students better software developers and prepare them for developing new and innovative mobile products.
Restriction: open to GAMP majors.
Note: Niagara College course BTGD 9877.
Administrative Assistant (Game Design)
Clara Suba
905-688-5550, extension 3270
Thistle 269D
Administrative Assistant (Game Programming)
Donna Phelps
905-688-5550, extension 3157
MCJ 332
brocku.ca/game
Computer and video games can be complex expressive, narrative, experiential, intelligent, cultural and creative systems. They integrate many types of content and media and are presented on a wide range of interactive digital platforms. The creation of computer games requires highly diverse technical and creative conceptualization, design, implementation and production processes. Games are typically produced by teams of people with specialized knowledge and skills who also understand and support the larger enterprise of the game which is to provide a user/player with challenge, agency and experience.
The GAME program combines study at Brock University and Niagara College, focusng on the concepts, contexts and mechanics of computer games. Students may choose one of two study options: Bachelor of Arts (Honours) Game Design and an Advanced Diploma in Game Development or a Bachelor of Science (Honours) Game Programming and an Advanced Diploma in Game Development. Students examine the history, discourses and production of games and participate in three major collaborative projects that result in the creation and production of fully realized computer games in the second, third and fourth years of the program.
Eligibility to continue in the GAME program is based on a student's major average and non-major average. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average will be permitted to continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the GAME program. With the approval of the Director of the Centre for Digital Humanities or the Chair of the Department of Computer Science, a student who is not eligible to continue may be permitted to complete a Bachelor of Arts degree in Interactive Arts and Science or a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science respectively. Required courses not yet completed in these programs will need to be met.

45

General Humanities
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
HUMA 0N01
Work Experience
Provides students with a work integrated learning experience with an approved employer relevant to the student's degree learning outcomes.
Restriction: Open to students with a minimum of 10.0 credits and who have attained 70% major and 60% non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor (students are required to successfully complete online professional training modules designed and delivered by Co-op, Career and Experiential Education (CCEE) prior to the start of their work experience term).
Note: Full-time work experience employment, 35-40 hours per week for 12 to 16 weeks.
HUMA 1P50
The Master Student
Introduction to core skills and best practices for learning in the Humanities classroom. Modules may include note-taking, effectivereading, essay writing, study strategies, time management and learning from feedback.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; seminar, 1 hour per week.
Note: offered in a blended format.
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
HUMA 0N01
Work Experience
Provides students with a work integrated learning experience with an approved employer relevant to the student's degree learning outcomes.
Restriction: Open to students with a minimum of 10.0 credits and who have attained 70% major and 60% non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor (students are required to successfully complete online professional training modules designed and delivered by Co-op, Career and Experiential Education (CCEE) prior to the start of their work experience term).
Note: Full-time work experience employment, 35-40 hours per week for 12 to 16 weeks.
HUMA 1P50
The Master Student
Introduction to core skills and best practices for learning in the Humanities classroom. Modules may include note-taking, effectivereading, essay writing, study strategies, time management and learning from feedback.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; seminar, 1 hour per week.
Note: offered in a blended format.

46

Geography
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
GEOGRAPHY COURSES
GEOG 1F90
Introduction to Human Geography
Practical and problem-oriented examination of spatial patterns of human organization and their links with social, cultural, economic, political and ecological processes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
GEOG 1F91
Principles of Physical Geography
The interactions of atmosphere, soils, vegetation and landforms occurring at the surface of the Earth. The development of natural environments and impacts upon people and their activities.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 2 hours bi-weekly.
GEOG 2P01
Introduction to Social Geography
Understanding the connections between space, society and knowledge; minds and bodies, communities, cities and streets, nations, economies and institutions, and ruralities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
GEOG 2P03
Cities in a Globalizing World
Introduction to role of global economy in contemporary city formation and evolution. Urban-economic geography theories and methodologies. Role of economy in the production of urban policy. Relation between geographical division of labor, regional specialization, trade and urbanization. Gender, race, and class in urban-economic context.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 2P02.
#GEOG 2P05
Earth Surface Processes
(also offered as ERSC 2P05)
Earth surface processes and geomorphology within global environments. A dynamic and physically based account of processes and the Earth's surface, linking the fields of sedimentology, physical geography and fluid mechanics.
Lectures, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and ERSC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F91 or ERSC 1P02 (1F01).
*GEOG 2P06
Cultural and Historical Geography
(also offered as PCUL 2P06)
Interactions among culture, society and landscape. The material and symbolic manifestations of culture in processes of landscape change.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, COMM 1F90, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TOUR 2P06.
*GEOG 2P07
Introduction to Geospatial Technologies
(also offered as ERSC 2P07, IASC 2P07 and TOUR 2P07)
Concepts and applications of geographic information systems (GIS), global positioning systems (GPS) and remote sensing. Properties of digital maps, airborne data and satellite imagery. Principles of map compilation and design. Practical experience in computer mapping, image interpretation and GIS analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
*GEOG 2P08
Climate Crisis
(also offered as ERSC 2P08)
Introduction to the Earth's atmosphere and the natural and anthropogenic drivers that change the Earth's climate system. Greenhouse effect, human activities that alter the climate system, climate models, climates of the past, projections of future climate.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
*GEOG 2P13
Resource and Environmental Geographies
(also offered as TOUR 2P13)
Analysis of the relation between resources, global environmental dynamics, and the management of uncertainty. Emphasis on the changing pattern of energy flows.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, 1F91, ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01), (1F90), (INTC 1F90), TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 1P91 and 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 2P18
Introduction to Plate Tectonics
(also offered as ERSC 2P18)
Topics include plate boundary settings, plate motion, driving forces, earthquakes and volcanic activity and detailed case studies. Labs focus on the analysis of geological maps.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F91 or one ERSC credit numbered 1(alpha)00 to 1(alpha)99.
#GEOG 2P21
Introduction to Research Design and Methodology
(also offered as TOUR 2P21)
Concepts related to research design. Properties of knowledge, preparing for research, describing and interpreting data.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, 1F91, TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 1P91 and 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 2P30
Culture, Heritage and Tourism
(also offered as TOUR 2P30)
Principles of preservation, conservation, and management of built and cultural resources for heritage tourism destinations on a variety of scales from World Heritage Sites to local heritage and cultural tourism attractions. Regional identities and environments and the importance of small and medium sized enterprises.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, TOUR 1P91, 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P10.
#GEOG 2P33
Sustainable Integrated Waste Management
(also offered as TOUR 2P33)
Waste reduction, reuse and recycling; environmentally sensible design. Waste auditing, optimal materials use and life cycle analysis. Sewage treatment technologies. Composting for managing organic waste and sewage. Tourism and waste management on land, on the water and in the air; managing wastes in remote and environmentally sensitive areas, camps and resorts. Policy, legislation and case studies.
Lectures, seminar, workshop, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, TOUR 1P91, 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P93.
#GEOG 2P36
Human Rights, Geography and Development
(also offered as TOUR 2P36)
Concept of Human Rights, civil and political rights in different geographic environments. Topics may include theories of rights, equity and freedom; the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International Bill of Rights; rights and equity issues in development, mobility, displacement and the environment.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: offered online.
GEOG 2P50
Geography of Canada
Analysis of factors underlying the development of Canada's distinctive regions emphasizing major metropolitan areas, resource regions and areas of decline.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: major credit will not be granted to GEOG majors.
GEOG 2P66
Introduction to Planning and Community Development
Introduction to planning theory, concepts and practice. Evolution of approaches and frameworks in planning from the 19th century through to today. Introductory overview of planning sub-fields: urban and regional planning; transportation planning, community development and social planning, rural planning, environmental planning, and economic development planning.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 2P94
Human-Dominated Ecosystems
(also offered as TOUR 2P94)
Human impacts in natural and built ecosystems from local to global scales. Key environmental issues, principles, policy options, problem solving and possibilities for creative planned change. Local examples from the Greenbelt and Niagara.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, 1F91, TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90) or permission of the instructor.
Note: the majority of classroom lectures will be replaced by 3-4 full-day field programs within the Niagara Region on Saturdays and Sundays in September and October; final scheduling details to be determined in consultation with students. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TREN 2P16 and TMGT (TREN) 2P94.
*GEOG 3F90
London Field Course
(also offered as TOUR 3F90)
Growth and development of London as a global city, capital of Britain, major metropolitan area and important tourist destination. Examination of its major functions, institutions, peoples and internal spatial structures. Planning issues involved in achieving an enriched urban environment.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two GEOG credits, two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3F92.
*GEOG 3F97
Tourism Field Course
(also offered as TOUR 3F97)
Intensive field course with relevance to tourism studies and geography.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3F70.
GEOG 3P04
Digital Mapping
Principles of cartography and advanced aspects of map design. Topics include geographic coordinate systems, cartographic techniques, data analysis, advances in online mapping, and use of mapping software.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
Note: practical experiences in mapping quantitative data and digital map production using commercially available software.
*GEOG 3P05
Geographic Information Systems
(also offered as ERSC 3P05 and IASC 3P05)
Principles and use of geographic information systems (GIS) as a tool for investigating and communicating spatial patterns in natural and anthropogenic systems: data acquisition, data management, spatial analysis, application development and cartographic display.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
*GEOG 3P07
Remote Sensing
(also offered as ERSC 3P07)
Theory and practice of remote sensing. Multispectral, hyperspectral, thermal, radar and laser imaging of the Earth's surface from airborne and spaceborne platforms. Image interpretation and image-analysis techniques.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
*GEOG 3P08
Meteorology
(also offered as ERSC 3P08)
Major concepts, principles and interactions related to the atmospheric-Earth systems, weather analysis and forecasting, natural and anthropogenic factors related to climate change and variability, weather hazards and extreme events, and biophysical feedback effects.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P08 or permission of instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG (ERSC) 2P04.
GEOG 3P09
Principles of Biogeography
Abiotic and biotic controls of plant and animal distributions at global to local scales. Impacts of climate and environmental change on organisms.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG (2P04), 2P08 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG (ERSC) 2P09.
GEOG 3P12
Climate and Winegrape Production
Climatological aspects of winegrape production emphasizing selected wine regions of the world. Effects of climate, weather-related diseases, topography, soil and viticulture practices on winegrape production.
Lectures, lab, field work, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG (2P04), 2P08 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students enrolled in the OEVI program and OEVI certificate students are permitted to register without the prerequisite.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OEVI 3P12.
*GEOG 3P13
Applied Climatology
(also offered as ERSC 3P13)
Studies in selected topics from the field of energy and moisture exchanges, air pollution, climatic change, climatic impact assessment and bioclimatology. Human impact on the climate along with applied microclimatological investigations and climatic data analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG (2P04), 2P08 or permission of the instructor.
*GEOG 3P14
Introduction to Soil Science
(also offered as OEVI 3P14)
Consideration of soil as a finite environmental resource. Physical, chemical, biological and hydrological processes within the soil system. Assessment and rehabilitation of contaminated soils.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 3P21
Qualitative Research Design and Methodology
(also offered as TOUR 3P21)
Aspects of qualitative research: project formulation, methodologies, writing-up; relation of theory and methodology.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 2P10.
*GEOG 3P22
Quantitative Research Design and Methodology
(also offered as TOUR 3P22)
Geographical concepts and applications of descriptive and inferential statistics. Use of measures of central tendency, hypothesis testing (t-test and ANOVA), regression analysis, non-parametric tests, spatial statistics and use of geographic information systems (GIS).
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
Students will not receive earned credit for GEOG 3P22 if MATH/STAT 1F92 has been successfully completed. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 2P11, 2P12 and MATH/STAT 1P98.
#GEOG 3P24
Glacial Geomorphology/Geology
(also offered as ERSC 3P24)
Introduction to glaciology; glacial processes, glacial deposits; their genesis and sedimentology. Relationship of glacial processes to landforms and surface topography. Glacial systems and facies associations. Applied aspects of glacial geology such as drift exploration.
Lectures, lab, field work, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P05.
#GEOG 3P25
Quaternary Geology
(also offered as ERSC 3P25)
Glaciations in the geological record, causes of glaciations, biotic responses to climatic changes, eustatic and isostatic sea level changes in response to glaciation, Quaternary stratigraphy and correlation of glacial and non-glacial events, application of Quaternary geology to economic and environmental problems, methods of paleoclimatic reconstruction.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 3P24, ERSC 2P03, 2P16 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 3P30
Tourism Planning and Development
(also offered as TOUR 3P30)
Role and function of tourism policy and planning. Planning and development of tourism resorts, attractions, tourism sites and regional economies through tourism; consideration of regional, provincial and national developments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P10.
#GEOG 3P34
Sustainable Transportation
(also offered as TOUR 3P34)
Interdisciplinary survey of the environmental, cultural, social and economic effects of automobiles, airplanes, trains and watercraft in built and natural environments. Impacts of tourist mobility. Principles, policies, and planning for sustainable transportation.
Lectures, seminar, workshop, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG (TMGT/TREN) 3P18.
#GEOG 3P35
Biomonitoring and Environmental Stress Assessment
(also offered as ERSC 3P35)
Use of biodiversity indicators, field methods and passive and active sensors to assess environmental quality. Collection and analysis of quantitative and qualitative data to investigate urban air and water pollution and forest health.
Lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 3P09 (2P09), BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90), ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01), (2P09).
Note: field trip(s) in September. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#GEOG 3P37
Croatia Field Course
(also offered as TOUR 3P37)
Intensive field course of relevance to tourism studies and geography.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two GEOG credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99, two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P70 and 3P71.
#GEOG 3P40
The New Niagara
(also offered as CANA 3P40)
Quantitative and qualitative techniques for examining Niagara's cultural, demographic and economic changes. Topics may include changes in Niagara's industries and occupations, Niagara's position in the world economy, regional growth coalitions, economic restructuring, income inequality, free trade, deindustrialization, agricultural decline, tourism, structural unemployment, demographic transition, in- and out-migration, brain drain, greying population, and transition to cognitive cultural economy.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F90, CANA 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
Note: labs involve using GIS and other software to map and analyze cultural, demographic and economic change in Niagara.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3P93 and GEOG (TREN/TMGT) 3P98.
GEOG 3P45
Urban Dystopias
Development of historical and contemporary cities under the influence of capital, religion, gender construction, racism, and environmental planning and design theories. Role of circular and cumulative causation, path dependence and unintended consequences in producing urban dystopias. Urban policies and urban political economies. Urban and social reform. Urban social and environmental justice.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P03, 2P06 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 3P50
Resource Management: Discourses, Policies and Ethics
(also offered as TOUR 3P50)
Ethical and political implications of competing discourses of both human and natural resource management. Emphasis on the production and uses of power from the level of individual leadership and network-building to that of the global governance of resources.
Lectures/seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P13 or permission of the instructor.
GEOG 3P56
Physical Geography Field Course
Application of geographical principles and field techniques to problems in physical geography.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): completion of Year 2 GEOG requirements in the BSc GEOG (single or combined) programs.
Note: field work in October in the week following Thanksgiving Day. Students must register with the Department by April of the preceding academic year. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3P57.
*GEOG 3P57
Human Geography and Tourism Studies Field Course
(also offered as TOUR 3P57)
Application of geographical principles and field techniques to problems in human geography and tourism studies.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): completion of Year 2 GEOG requirements in the BA GEOG (single or combined) programs or completion of Year 2 TOUR requirements in the BA Tourism Studies programs.
Note: field work in October in the week following Thanksgiving Day. Students must register with the Department by April of the preceding academic year. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3P56.
GEOG 3P60
Movement, Mobilities and Environment
Mobility as an important resource for 21st-century life. Introduction to geography's mobility turn, focusing on mobility justice, mobility disasters, mobility capital, differential mobilities and the environmental implications of contemporary mobilities.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, 1F91, TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 1P91 and 1P92, GEOG 2P13 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3V60.
*GEOG 3P61
Using the Canadian Census
(also offered as CANA 3P61)
Historical and contemporary structure and its related surveys, surveys carried out by Statistics Canada such as the Labour Force Survey or Community Health Survey and applications in digital mapping and demographic analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3V61.
GEOG 3P66
Critical Perspectives on Planning and Community Development
Detailed exploration of contentious planning issues affecting urban and rural communities. Causes, impacts and proposed solutions for major planning problems, emphasizing concerns such as social and environmental justice, economic restructuring, inclusion and exclusion, and transportation disadvantage.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 2P03, 2P06, 2P66 or permission of the instructor.
GEOG 3P70
Geographies of Social Exclusion and Social Change
Detailed theoretical and conceptual explorations of how social relations, identities and inequalities are produced and reproduced in and through various material, digital and imagined spaces. Topics include gendered, racial and sexualized inequalities, homelessness, social security and poverty, dis/abilities, colonial present, health geographies, geographies of care, militarized violence, and citizenship.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P01 or permission of the instructor.
GEOG 3P80
Geography and International Development
Analysis of international development theory, policy and practice. Development's relation to globalization, imperialism and neo-colonialism. Development solutions to environmental problems. Selected case studies from the developing world.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 2P01, 2P13 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 3P80.
*GEOG 3P83
Geography of Water Resources
(also offered as ERSC 3P83 and TOUR 3P83)
Physical and human factors affecting patterns of use and development of water resources. Emphasis on patterns of supply and demand, approaches to development and management of the resource, problems and alternative strategies.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, 1F91, ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01) or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 3P85
Ecology of a Changing Planet
(also offered as BIOL 3P85 and ERSC 3P85)
Impact of environmental change and human activity on ecosystems. Topics include climate change and global warming, habitat fragmentation, extinction, invasive species, conservation biology and the management of ecological integrity.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 3P09 (2P09), BIOL 2P05, 2Q04, (ERSC 2P09).
GEOG 3P86
Place, Belonging and Exclusion
Ways that places and cultural identities produce one another through ongoing processes of contestation. Analyzes power, belonging, transgression and resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 2P01, 2P03, 2P06 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 3P86.
*GEOG 3P91
Chicago Field Course
(also offered as TOUR 3P91)
Cultural and historical geographies of Chicago. Emphasis on the urban spectacle of the modern city and the contrasting geographies of race and class inequalities through the examination of public space, architecture, housing and suburbanization, cultural production, and tourism.
Restriction: permission of the Department
Prerequisite(s): two GEOG credits, two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#GEOG 3P92
Close-range Photogrammetry: Ground School
(also offered as ERSC 3P92)
History, theory and use of close-range terrestrial and aerial photogrammetry, structure-from-motion point cloud production and analysis of 2D, 3D, 4D models, satellite based positioning systems and survey control including real-time and post-processed-kinematic surveying (RTK, PPK), operation and use of common sensors in Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS), image acquisition, quality control and data processing. Classroom and lab with ground-based photogrammetry projects.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ERSC (single or combined), GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd majors with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
*GEOG 3P95
Advanced Geographic Information Systems
(also offered as ERSC 3P95)
Advanced study of geographic information systems emphasizing the use of several leading edge software for solving complex geospatial questions. Evaluating the extent of human-induced landscape changes. Builds on key concepts from GEOG 3P05, including data acquisition techniques (e.g., GPS, unmanned aviation), data management, georeferencing, geoprocessing, spatial modelling and statistics, and cartography.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and ERSC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to GEOG (single, combined or general studies), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), ERSC (single, combined or general studies) majors, GHUM, SOSC students, GEOG and ERSC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P05.
*GEOG 3Q93
Vancouver Field Course
(also offered as TOUR 3Q93)
Cultural, historical and tourism geographies of Vancouver. Emphasis on the urban spectacle of the modern city and the contrasting geographies of race and class inequalities through the examination of public space, architecture, tourism spaces, housing and suburbanization and cultural production.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two GEOG credits, two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#GEOG 3Q99
Field School-Quaternary Geology
(also offered as ERSC 3Q99)
Field and laboratory methods for analysis of Quaternary landscapes based on field sites including fluvial, hillslope, coastal, glacial, and biosphere examples.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): ERSC (GEOG) 2P17 or ERSC 2P18.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
GEOG 3V60-3V69
Special Topics in Geography
Topics selected from year to year on the basis of faculty expertise.
GEOG 3V90-3V99
Selected Field Studies and Directed Readings
Application of geographical methods and techniques to the analysis of field data and problems; two weeks of field work in a selected area.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: experience in hiking and wilderness travel recommended.
*GEOG 4F90
Honours Thesis
(also offered as TOUR 4F90)
Individual research project carried out under the direction of a faculty adviser.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), TMGT and TREN majors with a minimum 75 percent in all Year 3 Geography or Tourism courses, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: students contemplating a thesis must consult with a possible Faculty Supervisor in D2 of Year 3. The student must submit a detailed proposal to the possible Faculty Supervisor by March 15 of D3 of Year 3. Regulations governing the thesis may be obtained from the Administrative Co-ordinator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 4F90.
*GEOG 4F99
Honours Internship
(also offered as TOUR 4F99)
Internship on a specific geographic or tourism problem or task under either the direction of a faculty member, or in a government or private agency working under the supervision of that agency.
Internship, 8 hours per week for 15 weeks; seminar, 3 hours per week for 9 weeks.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), TMGT and TREN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department
*GEOG 4P07
Advanced Remote Sensing
(also offered as ERSC 4P07)
Theory and practice of in situ, airborne and spaceborne remote sensing. Emphasis on techniques used to study natural and human-made environments. Topics include data acquisition and preprocessing, image analysis, accuracy assessment and the production of information products. Image processing and analyses using commercially available image-analysis software.
Lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and ERSC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P07 or permission of the instructor.
GEOG 4P12
Research Topics in Applied Climatology
Climatic hazards, their causes, impacts, mitigation and adaptation strategies, vulnerability issues, field work, data collection and analysis, methodological approaches and applications to several fields of human activities, environmental impact assessment.
Seminar, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): GEOG (2P04) or 2P08; GEOG 3P12 or 3P13 or permission of the instructor.
*GEOG 4P26
Stream Form and Function
(also offered as BIOL 4P26 and ERSC 4P26)
Exploration of the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of stream systems.
Seminar, lab, field work, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and ERSC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 3P09, (ERSC 2P09), BIOL 2P05, 2Q04 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 4P28
Advanced Glacial Sedimentology
(also offered as ERSC 4P28)
Sedimentology of present day glacial environments and of Quaternary sediments. Thermo-mechanical principles of glacier physics as applied to past and present glacier ice conditions. Glacial lithofacies associations. Glacio-tectonics and diagenesis. Principles of glacial erosion, entrainment and deposition.
Lectures, lab, local field trip, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P24 or 3P26.
#GEOG 4P32
Sustainable Rural Tourism
(also offered as TOUR 4P32)
Socio-economic challenges of rural communities in developed and developing nations. Critical evaluation of rural tourism as an alternative community development tool.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two GEOG credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99, two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 4P63 and TMGT (TREN) 4P17.
GEOG 4P50
Critical Analysis of Urban and Economic Geographies
Advanced study of the urban and economic geographies of 21st-century cities and their hinterlands, with special research projects in the Niagara Region. Possible topics include innovation, cultural economy, political economy, public policy and public space, brain-drain, population aging, deindustrialization, seasonal economies, high-tech manufacturing, retirement communities, youth poverty and long-term unemployment.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P45, 3P66 or permission of the instructor.
GEOG 4P66
Advanced Topics in Planning and Community Development
Application of planning skills to selected local and regional growth and development problems under the overarching theme of sustainable development.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P45, 3P66 or permission of the instructor.
Note: individual and group field-based projects, along with field trips, are integral components.
GEOG 4P70
Research in Social Geography
Advanced theories and themes in social geography including critical explorations of theoretical and conceptual understandings of power and resistance. Topics including social and spatial relations of intersectional power relations, new formations of difference and diversity as well as social resistance.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P70 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST 4P70.
GEOG 4P71
Research in Cultural Geography
Consideration of selected debates, theoretical issues and empirical themes relating to the spatiality of culture through small-group discussion and the pursuit of independent research projects.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P86 or permission of the instructor.
*GEOG 4P80
Dendrochronology
(also offered as BIOL 4P80 and ERSC 4P80)
Fundamental principles of tree-ring analysis and applications to address contemporary issues in the fields of climate and environmental change, geomorphology, archaeology and ecology.
Lectures, local field trip, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BIOL (single or combined), BIOL Honours/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and ERSC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 3P09, BIOL 2Q04, (ERSC 2P09) or permission of the instructor.
Note: BIOL majors must take BIOL 2Q04; BIOL 2P93 or 2P94 is strongly recommended.
*GEOG 4P83
Research Themes in Water Resources
(also offered as TOUR 4P83)
Major debates and conflicts over water resources and their distribution. Emphasis on patterns of supply and demand, approaches to development and management of the resource, problems, and alternative strategies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG (single or combined), GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), TMGT and TREN majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P83 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 4P85
Ecosystems and Changing Disturbance Regimes
(also offered as BIOL 4P85 and ERSC 4P85)
Terrestrial ecosystem response to large-scale environmental change. Topics may include disturbance regimes, adaptation, alteration of biogeochemical cycles, invasive species and range shifts, carbon cycle feedbacks, predicting future climate and vegetation impacts, change detection, scaling-up and nonlinearity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
#GEOG 4P92
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems: practicum
(also offered as ERSC 4P92)
Introduction to the use of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) for data acquisition. Aviation safety, risk management, mission planning and execution. A culminating exercise involves UAS flight operation, map production and data analysis.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 3P92
Note: possession of valid Transport Canada Pilot Certificate - Basic or Advanced Operations. A field activity and RPAS user fee will be assessed. Overnight off campus travel may be required. An orientation session will be held prior to registration.
GEOG 4P95
Directed Readings I
Topic not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial.
GEOG 4P96
Directed Readings II
Topic not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial.
CO-OP COURSES
GEOG 0N01
Co-op Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students
GEOG 0N02
Co-op Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
GEOG 0N03
Co-op Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
GEOG 0N04
Co-op Work Placement IV
Optional co-op work placement (4months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
GEOG 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional co-op work placement (4months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
GEOG 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentations, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
GEOG 2C01
Co-op Relective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 0N90.
Corequisite(s): GEOG 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
GEOG 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 0N90.
Corequisite(s): GEOG 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
GEOG 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academics studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 0N90.
Corequisite(s): GEOG 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
GEOG 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 0N90.
Corequisite(s): GEOG 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
GEOG 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to GEOG Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 0N90.
Corequisite(s): GEOG 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Co-ordinator
Virginia Wagg
905-688-5550, extension 3484
Mackenzie Chown C322
brocku.ca/geotour
The discipline of Geography has a broad scope and combines elements of both the social and natural sciences. Two principal divisions of the subject exist - human geography and physical geography - linked by a common background: a mutual concern for humans and the environment, and a body of related theory and methodology.
Geography majors at Brock may choose from the following degree programs: BA Geography and BSc Geography. Within each program students with a minimum 70 percent major average may be admitted to the Honours degree program at any time. An Honours degree program provides students with an opportunity for a more intensive examination of issues in the discipline. These programs are described in detail in subsequent sections.
The Department also participates in four-year Co-op programs leading to a BA or BSc Honours degree.
The Department and the Faculty of Education co-operate in offering a Concurrent BA (Honours) or BSc (Honours)/BEd degree at both the Junior/Intermediate and Intermediate/Senior levels.
Most courses emphasize structured labs and seminars in early years and progressively more independent work in later years, culminating in an optional honours thesis in year 4. Field work features prominently in some courses. Students should note that a nominal fee may be charged in courses having a field work or laboratory component.
Two field courses, GEOG 3P56 and 3P57, are held in October in the week following Thanksgiving Day, with seminars/labs during the term. One of these courses is mandatory for students entering year 3; prospective students must register with the Department by April of the preceding academic year.
GEOG 4F99 is a required internship course in year 4, enabling students to obtain work experience while still at the University. Prospective students must register with the Department by April of the preceding academic year.
Physical laboratories and equipment are available for work in biogeography, climatology, geomorphology, hydrology and soil science. Computer labs with geomatics software are also available for students interested in geographic information systems, remote sensing and digital mapping. The University Map, Data and GIS Library contains an extensive collection of maps, atlases and geospatial datasets housed adjacent to the Department of Geography and Tourism Studies.

47

Geography and Tourism Studies

48

Health Sciences
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
HEALTH SCIENCES COURSES
HLSC 1F25
Health: A Canadian Perspective
Canadian contemporary health issues and their application to health behaviour.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Note: offered online. Intended for non-Health Sciences students and those not planning to take further Health Sciences courses. Major credit will not be granted to Biomedical Sciences, Child Health, Community Health, Health Sciences, Medical Sciences and Public Health majors.
HLSC 1F90
Introduction to Health Sciences
Issues and controversies in the area of health. Aspects of health status, determinants of health and personal health.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; seminar, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
HLSC 2P00
Writing in Health Sciences
Practical experience in scholarly writing and presentation, focusing on diverse audiences and communication channels.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
HLSC 2P02
Infection Control and Safety
Best practices in infection control and safety, infectious diseases, health care infections, blood-borne pathogens, prevention, and post-exposure prophylaxis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
HLSC 2P07
Biostatistics I
Fundamental statistical principles and techniques for research. Issues concerning the construction, administration and evaluation of data collection as well as the processing and analysis of data.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90; one of BIOL 1P96, MATH/STAT 1F92, 1P98, 1P99.
HLSC 2P09
Principles of Human Physiology
Molecular, cellular, tissue and organ physiology. Topics include cell structure and function, energy and cellular metabolism, cell transport processes, signal transduction, and nervous, muscle, endocrine, and immune systems.
Lectures, lab, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92) or one 12U Chemistry credit is also strongly recommended. Provides foundation for students seeking Cardiac Rehabilitation Certification. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE (PEKN) 2P09.
HLSC 2P21
The Health of Canadian Society
Health status of Canadians and the history and structure of the health care system.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI 2P26.
HLSC 2P27
Research Methods in Health
Introduction to research designs across health disciplines including issues and controversies in conducting research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90; one of BIOL 1P96, MATH/STAT 1F92, 1P98, 1P99.
HLSC 2P40
Gerontology: Approaches to Well-being
Interdisciplinary aspects of aging and wellness; issues related to lifestyle and disease prevention, health care and social services, ageism, social security, family and community support, and death and dying.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, SPMA majors and GERO minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
Note: Gerontology minors, without the prerequisite, will need to contact the Department to register.
HLSC 2P49
Health and Behaviour
Understanding and applying individual-, interpersonal-, group- and community-level health behaviour change theories.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CMTY and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
HLSC 2P50
Introduction to Human Sexuality
Research methodology, theoretical and biological foundations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 3P34.
*HLSC 2P60
Introduction to the History of Medicine
(also offered as HIST 2P60)
Changes in cultural knowledge of health and illness; social perceptions of the role of health care professionals and the impact on individual actions and government policy through history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and HIST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90 or one HIST credit.
#HLSC 2P65
Health Economics
(also offered as ECON 2P65)
Basic economic theory as it applies to health. Examination of international public health issues. Topics may include cost-benefit analysis, insurance, infectious and non-infectious disease, pharmaceutical industry, addictive substances, Aboriginal health, poverty and homelessness, and the future of Canada's healthcare system.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
HLSC 2P90
Advanced Human Sexuality
Topics include sexual attraction and love, sexual orientation, pornography and prostitution, sexual assault, sexual disorders, STIs and sex therapy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P50 or PSYC 3P34.
HLSC 2P91
Nutrition
Introduction to nutritional sciences. Uptake and metabolic role of nutrients and their role in health maintenance throughout the lifespan.
Lectures, lab, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90 or BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: students may not concurrently register in HLSC 2P92 or KINE (PEKN) 2P20.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2P92 and KINE (PEKN) 2P20.
HLSC 2P92
Nutrition in Health Care
Introduction to nutrition and nutritional sciences and its role within a health-care centric context.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, MSCI and Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90 or BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: students may not concurrently register in HLSC 2P91 or KINE (PEKN) 2P20.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2P91 and KINE (PEKN) 2P20.
HLSC 2P95
Human Systems Anatomy
Systemic approach, emphasizing the functional aspects of gross and histologic anatomy.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, MSCI and NMTR majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH and NMTR majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and BIOL 1P92 (1F90).
Note: materials fee required. Students may not concurrently register in KINE 1P90 and/or 1P99.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2F95, KINE (PEKN) 1P90 and KINE 1P99.
HLSC 2P96
Human Musculoskeletal Anatomy
Functional anatomy of the human body, emphasizing the musculoskeletal system, peripheral vasculature and major nerve trunks.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, MSCI and NMTR majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH and NMTR majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: materials fee required. Students may not concurrently register in KINE 1P98.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2F95 and KINE 1P98.
HLSC 2P98
Public Health and Society
Introduction to public health including history, structure, core principles, and the social and political forces that influence population health.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 3P98.
HLSC 3F97
Global Health Field Course
Theoretical and practical learning opportunity examining health issues within a developing country emphasizing Infectious Diseases. Study of differences in health and disease patterns, health care delivery, and access as well as socioeconomic, cultural and environmental determinants of health.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P97 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students must contact the instructor for an application form. Students must be over 18 years of age and have a valid passport, visa, and immunizations as required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
HLSC 3P02
Human Immunology
Elements and principles of the human immune system and its role in prevention of infectious disease.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BIOL, BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90, BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2P01.
HLSC 3P07
Biostatistics II
Intermediate statistical principles in research from conceptual and practical perspectives.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P07.
HLSC 3P09
Human Endocrinology
Physiological functions and cellular mechanisms of actions of hormones. Abnormalities of hormonal control leading to disease. Topics include pituitary, thyroid, adrenocortical, pancreatic and gonadal hormones.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P09 or KINE (PEKN) 2P09.
HLSC 3P19
Principles of Pharmacology
Drug absorption, distribution, biotrans-formation, clearance and mechanisms of action. Nervous, cardiovascular, endocrine system, renal and respiratory drugs. Drug development and regulations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, MSCI and Nursing majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH and Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P95 (HLSC 2F95); HLSC 2P09 or KINE (PEKN) 2P09.
HLSC 3P21
Issues in Canadian Health Policy
Inter-disciplinary perspective of how contemporary health policies influence the health of individuals, communities and populations in Canada.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P21.
HLSC 3P25
Mental Health and Addictions
Examination of the concepts of mental health and addiction from a critical (socio-ecological) perspective. Overview of key areas in knowledge, theory and practice from a public health perspective.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P21 and 2P49.
Note: materials fee required.
#HLSC 3P26
Medical Sociology
(also offered as SOCI 3P26)
Social factors associated with physical health, illness and impairments; health care delivery systems and the factors which influence their utilization.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): SOCI 1F90 or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
HLSC 3P37
Qualitative Research in Health Sciences
Introduction to qualitative research approaches in health and public health. Different traditions of qualitative inquiry and research design. Knowledge and hands-on experience in data collection, analysis and dissemination.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CMTY and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P27.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE (PEKN) 3P18, RECL 3Q17 and SPMA 3P17.
HLSC 3P50
Health Promotion
Understanding health promotion principles, history, major theories and approaches, and their applications used to health promotion in the Canadian and global public health contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P07.
#HLSC 3P51
Principles of Genetic Inheritance
(also offered as BIOL 3P51)
Concepts of classical genetics including Mendelian inheritance,  genetic mapping, extra-nuclear inheritance, chromosome transmission, polyploidy and population genetics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week for 6 weeks.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
#HLSC 3P68
Gender and Health: Local and Global Issues
(also offered as CHYS 3P68 and WGST 3P68)
Issues relating to women, gender and health and wellness from a critical feminist perspective. Themes on social and political contexts concerning women, girls, genders and health; social and environmental issues affecting health and illness; personal and cultural meanings of health and the body.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 6.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of HLSC 1F90, CHYS 1F90, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be available online.
*HLSC 3P80
The Health of Children
(also offered as CHYS 3P80)
Exploration of the biological, psychological and sociological determinants of children's health.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, PHTH, CHYS (single or combined) and CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, CHYS (single or combined) and CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90 or CHYS 2P10; HLSC 2P27, or CHYS 2P51 and 2P52 (2F50).
HLSC 3P90
Cardiac Pathophysiology
Introduction to basic cardiac pathophysiology. Topics include heart structure and function, arterial dynamics and blood flow, risk factors associated with and mechanisms of various types of cardiovascular disease.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, BKin and BSc (Kin) majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P95 (HLSC 2F95) or KINE 1P90; HLSC 2P09 or KINE (PEKN) 2P09.
HLSC 3P91
Cardiac Rehabilitation
Introduction to principles of cardiac rehabilitation. Topics include current national guidelines, best practice procedures and benefits of cardiac rehabilitation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, BKin and BSc (Kin) majors. Students must have a minimum 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P90.
HLSC 3P92
Processes of Health and Wellness
Social, cultural and political context of health interventions. How medical power is constructed and diffused. Characteristics, strengths and weaknesses in alternative and mainstream medical approaches to individual and community health.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90.
Note: HLSC 2P21 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2P15.
HLSC 3P93
Nutrition in Health and Disease
Overview of nutrition therapy, focusing on current literature outlining nutritional practices associated with specific diseases.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of HLSC 2P91, HLSC 2P92, KINE 2P20; one of HLSC 2P09, BIOL 2P97, KINE (PEKN) 2P09.
HLSC 3P94
Health Administration
Introduction to management principles of planning, organizing, leading and delivering health services in various health care settings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P21.
HLSC 3P95
Cardiac Rehabilitation Practicum
Practical experience in a cardiac rehabilitation setting. Introduction to exercise stress testing, patient intake and assessment, and exercise prescription.
Placement, 60 hours including one introductory/training lecture.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, BKIN and BSc (KIN) majors with a minimum 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P90.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of placements. May be taken concurrently with HLSC 3P90. Students gain valuable practical experience which may be used towards accreditation as a Cardiac Rehab Specialist. Must have valid CPR certification prior to first day of class. Transportation is a student responsibility.
HLSC 3P96
The Development of Healthy Communities
Social, economic and environmental factors and processes which influence community well-being.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P37 and 3P50.
HLSC 3P97
Medical Microbiology
Overview of disease-causing infectious agents including bacteria, fungi, viruses, prions and parasites. Biological principles of infection and the interactions between pathogens and the immune system. Clinical importance of infectious disease and main methods for laboratory diagnosis. Diseases of major importance as learning examples.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MSCI and Nursing majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH and Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90).
HLSC 3P99
Pharmacology and the Nervous System
Study how medications can alter the functions of the peripheral nervous system.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P19.
HLSC 3Q20
Constructing Health Campaigns
Designing effective public health movements, focusing on grassroots mobilization, social marketing and influencers, digital technologies, advocacy, supportive environments, and collaborative practices. Formative and outcome evaluation approaches for generating and measuring success.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CMTY and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit in HLSC 3F20.
HLSC 3Q90
Geospatial Analytics for Public Health
Introduction to application of geospatial analysis and GIS (Geographic Information Systems) in public health. Geographic distribution of diseases and exposures, assessment of healthcare accessibility, health data visualization, and mapping of vulnerable populations, risk factors, health outcomes and the relation between them.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, GEOG, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of BIOL 1P96, GEOG 2P21, MATH/STAT 1F92, 1P98, 1P99, TOUR 2P21.
Note: students should have familiarity working with spreadsheets and proficiency with the Windows PC environment.
HLSC 3Q96
Childhood Obesity
Prevention programs and policies, and strategies to promote healthy eating and physical activity among children and youth. Interrelating social, environmental, behavioural, and biological factors associated with obesity, diet, and physical activity among children and youth.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P91.
HLSC 3Q97
Global Health
Major health problems and health determinants that transcend national boundaries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
HLSC 3Q98
Laboratory Techniques for Biomedical Research
Introduction to laboratory techniques for separation and analyses of different molecular species. Topics include gene, protein, and lipid analysis with an emphasis on physiochemical characteristics.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, MSCI, BIOL, BSc (Kin) and NMTR majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P09 or BIOL 2P97
Note: materials fee required.
HLSC 3V50-3V99
Special Topics in Health Sciences
Specialized topics of human health and wellness.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
HLSC 4F44
Public Health Practices
Application of theories, models and concepts to emerging public health issues and contemporary role of public health in local and global communities including applied experiences and knowledge translation strategies.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P21 and 3P50, 3Q20 and 3Q21 (3F20).
Note: this is a limited enrolment course.
HLSC 4F93
Field Experience from Local to Global Health
Theoretical and practical experience examining local and global issues inhealth from an interdisciplinary perspective.
Lectures, Seminar, Fieldwork
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits andpermission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students must complete an application and interview prior to beingadmitted into the course. Students must be at least 18 years of age and have a valid passport, visa, immunizations and Police Vulnerable Sector Check as required. Students are required to pay their own expenses.
HLSC 4P02
Medical Immunology
Applications of human immunology in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases including chronic and acute infection, graft rejection, autoimmunity, allergy, and cancer.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BIOL, BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90 and 3P02 (2P01).
Note: materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 3P01.
HLSC 4P03
Global Issues in Infectious Diseases
World changes and their influence on emergence and re-emergence of infectious diseases. Interrelating biological, social and environmental factors that contribute to infectious disease causality and their impact on global societies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH majors and ENSU minors. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 1F90, INTC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC (INTC) 2P97 and INTC 4P03.
HLSC 4P04
Environmental Health
Impact of natural and built environment on human health, emergencies and societal responses.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH majors and ENSU minors. Students must have a minimum 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P98 (3P98) or 3P97.
HLSC 4P07
Secondary Data Analysis
Utilization of large population surveys and census data emphasizing active (experiential) learning.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P07.
HLSC 4P15
Critical Health: Challenging Ideas in Health Care
Examination of issues such as obesity, breastfeeding, addiction, smoking, professional authority and access, using tools from disciplines including history, sociology and anthropology.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P92 (2P15).
HLSC 4P17
Logistic Regression in Health Sciences
Analytic methods to examine risk association between exposure and health outcomes in health sciences-related areas.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, and a minimum 75 percent major average.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P07 (minimum 80 percent) and HLSC 3P07 (minimum 80 percent) or permission of the instructor.
HLSC 4P19
Integrated Cardiovascular Pharmacology
Pharmacologic basis for therapeutics and management of cardiovascular disease in humans and approaches used to study drugs and drug mechanisms on the cardiovascular system.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P19 or 3P99.
#HLSC 4P26
Sociology of Health
(also offered as SOCI 4P26)
Selected social policy issues in medical sociology, psychiatric sociology or related subdisciplines. Topics may include the politics of individualizing health problems, clinical sociology and related topics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH and SOCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
HLSC 4P30
Advanced Directed Readings
Topic of study not available among the regular course offerings, designed in consultation with a faculty supervisor.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: enrolment limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 4P31
Special Topics in Health Issues
Social, cultural and political complexity of health issues. Discourses of good and bad health behaviour. Biopolitics of health citizenship.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 4P15 or permission of instructor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 4P40
Public Health Capstone
Identification of areas of public health concern and understanding of evidence-driving policy and programming.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CMTY and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3Q20 and 3Q21 (3F20) and 3P21.
#HLSC 4P41
Human Molecular Genetics
(also offered as BCHM 4P41, BIOL 4P41 and BTEC 4P41)
Principles of human genetics, human genome organization, pedigree, disease gene mapping, forensic and cancer genomics, genome sequencing, personal genomics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 3P50 or 3P51.
HLSC 4P50
Research Methods in Epidemiology
Epidemiological research methods and identification of risk factors.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P27.
HLSC 4P51
Pandemics and their Impact on Society
Biological, physiological, environmental and behavioural factors involved in transmission and persistence; epidemiological patterns; individual and societal factors determining occurrence and impact in different populations; examination of multi-factorial causality of HIV/AIDS and other pandemics to increase understanding and awareness of the ongoing pandemic.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of HLSC 2P02, HLSC 2P98 (3P98), HLSC 3P97.
HLSC 4P59
Diversity and Health
Current issues of health and equity across diverse populations in Canada emphasizing social, cultural and political processes as determinants of health.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P21.
HLSC 4P60
History of Disease in Society
Issues around the perception, treatment, and social and cultural impact of disease in Western society.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P60 or permission of the instructor.
HLSC 4P69
Child Mental Health
Children's mental health and psychiatric disorders.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P80.
HLSC 4P77
Experiential Learning in Biostatistics
Application of statistics knowledge, skills and effective instructional techniques that enhance learners' knowledge of biostatistics.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 12.5 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P07 (minimum 80 percent) and 3P07 (minimum 80 percent) and permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment is limited. Application and selection process occurs in the term prior to enrolment. Students enrolled in this course may mentor students in HLSC 2P07 and 3P07.
HLSC 4P80
Physical Activity in Child Health and Disease
Physical activity and sedentary behaviour among children and youth. Their role in health and chronic disease, psychosocial and environmental determinants, and a critical evaluation of public health, community and individual-level interventions
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P80.
Note: delivered in a problem-based, self-directed adult learning format.
HLSC 4P89
Current Topics in Infection and Immunity
Landmark and current research from the field, with topics from infectious diseases, allergic inflammation, cancer immunology, immunogenetics, molecular immunology, and emerging challenges and strategies in vaccination and immunotherapy.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BIOL, BMED, CHHS, CHLH, MSCI, BKin, BSc (Kin), and PHTH majors.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 4P02.
HLSC 4P95
Human Pathology
Principles and current knowledge in general pathology; generic pathogenic mechanisms and commonly occurring examples of disease from selected organ systems.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P09; HLSC 2P95 and 2P96 (HLSC 2F95), or HLSC 2P95 and KINE 1P98.
Note: materials fee required.
HLSC 4P96
Pathophysiology of Metabolic Syndrome
Metabolic syndrome and related pathologies, such as insulin resistance, obesity, cardiovascular disease and neurodegeneration. Analysis of roles of adipose tissue, liver and skeletal muscle.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, MSCI, PHTH, BKin and BSc (Kin) majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of HLSC 2P09, BIOL 2P97, KINE (PEKN) 2P09.
HLSC 4P97
Tropical Parasites of Humans and Animals
Overview of major tropical parasitic diseases affecting human and animal health, emphasizing neglected diseases. Topics include parasite biology, virulence mechanisms, the natural history, medical and social impact, and the global control efforts of these tropical diseases. Hands-on experience and insight into the diagnostic methodology utilized for these diseases.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum 75 percent major average.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P97.
Note: materials fee required.
HLSC 4P98
Biomarkers and Disease Processes
Biomarkers as aids in basic and clinical research as well as in clinical practice. Emphasis on Omics as tools for searching, identifying, and developing biological molecules as markers useful in understanding pathological and other biological processes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, MSCI, BIOL, BSc (Kin) and NMTR majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of HLSC 2P09, BIOL 2P97, KINE 2P09.
HLSC 4P99
Clinical Epidemiology
Description and principles of clinical epidemiology. Decision-making strategies for implementing and evaluating clinical research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P07.
Note: HLSC 3P07 is recommended.
#HLSC 4Q90
Foundations of Collaboration and Teamwork
(also offered as KINE 4Q90, NUSC 4Q90, RECL 4Q90 and SPMA 4Q90)
Core competencies for effective teamwork. Topics include collaborative leadership, team functioning, communication, role clarity, conflict management and client-centred approach as it applies to a diversity of inter professional settings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), NUBR, NURS, RECL and SPMA majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
HLSC 4V50-4V99
Advanced Special Topics in Health Sciences
Specialized topics in human health and wellness.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
CO-OP COURSES
HLSC 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHTH Co-op students.
HLSC 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHTH Co-op students.
HLSC 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHTH Co-op students.
HLSC 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentation, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH Co-op students.
HLSC 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHTH Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HLSC 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
HLSC 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHTH Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HLSC 0N02.
HLSC 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHTH Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HLSC 0N03.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING COURSES
HLSC 3P30
Directed Readings
Topic of study not available among the regular course offerings, designed in consultation with a faculty supervisor.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 3P31
Applied Projects in Health Quality Improvement
Directed reading and applied project course focused on principles of developing and leading health system improvements.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of projects. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 3P32
Applied Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Research project applying the principles of epidemiology and biostatistics, designed in consultation with the faculty member directing this course.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent average and permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 3P33
Experiential Learning in Health Sciences
Volunteer practicum in a clinical or public health setting.
Practicum, minimum 50 hours.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: course deliverables will be determined through direct consultation with the faculty supervisor. Enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the department.
HLSC 3P34
Experiential Learning in Child Health
Volunteer practicum in a clinical or public health setting related to Child Health.
Practicum, minimum 50 hours.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: course deliverables will be determined through direct consultation with the faculty supervisor. Enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the department.
HLSC 3Q21
Health Campaigns in Action
Practical experience implementing and evaluating a micro public health movement. Skill development in grassroots mobilization, social marketing, advocacy, collaboration, formative evaluation techniques, survey construction, data collection and analysis, and knowledge translation.
Lectures 1 hour per week, seminar 1 hour per week, experiential 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI and PHTH majors. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 2P07 and HLSC 3Q20.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 3F20.
HLSC 3Q91
Special Topics in Medical Sciences
Scholarly project (which may include laboratory-based research and/or independent study) designed in consultation with a faculty supervisor.
Restriction: open to BMED and MSCI majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 3Q92
Special Topics in Public Health
Scholarly project (which may include community-based work and/or independent study) designed in consultation with a faculty supervisor.
Restriction: open to PHTH majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 3Q93
Special Topics in Child Health
Scholarly project (which may include community-based work and/or independent study) designed in consultation with a faculty supervisor.
Restriction: open to CHHS, CHLH majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms can be obtained from the Department.
HLSC 4F90
Thesis
Original research project culminating in a thesis carried out with a faculty supervisor. Topics are to be chosen in consultation with a faculty supervisor.
Lectures, 2 hours per week in alternate weeks.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, MSCI, PHTH majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, a minimum 80 percent major average, and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms available from the Department.
HLSC 4F91
Health Quality Improvement Special Projects
Application of quality improvement theories and concepts in an applied project with community partners.
Lectures, 1 hour in alternating weeks; online educational modules; 4 hour on-site practicum placement per week.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): HLSC 3P31 and 3P94.
Note: enrolment limited. Students who meet restrictions and prerequisites must apply to the course instructor in April for September admission. Application information is presented in prerequisite courses.
HLSC 4F92
Thesis Research
Research project involving laboratory or experience based studies under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to BMED, CHHS, CHLH, MSCI and PHTH majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, a minimum 80 percent major average and permission of a faculty supervisor.
Corequisite(s): HLSC 4F90.
Note: enrolment is limited and is dependent upon availability of faculty supervisors. Course authorization forms available from the Department.
Chair
Paul LeBlanc
Professors Emeriti
John Hay, Martin Tammemagi
Professors
Anthony F. Bogaert, Jens Coorssen, Brent E. Faught, Paul LeBlanc, Jian Liu, Deborah D. O'Leary, Ana Sanchez, Evangelia L. Tsiani, Terrance J. Wade, Wendy Ward
Associate Professors
Paula Gardner, Madelyn Law, Kelli-an G. Lawrance, Adam MacNeil, Dan Malleck, Miya Narushima, William Pickett, Hui Di Wang
Assistant Professors
Antony Chum, Heather Church, Eduardo Fernandez, Asif Khowaja, Rebecca MacPherson, Valerie Michaelson, Karen Patte,
Adjunct Professors
Susan Johnston, Kathy Moscou, Immaculate Nevis, Jennifer Tsang
Undergraduate Program Co-ordinator
Maryann Polce-Gordon
Experiential Education Co-ordinator
Janet Westbury
Senior Laboratory Demonstrator
Martin Dragan
Wet Laboratory Co-ordinator
Parthajit Mukherjee
Director, Co-op, Career and Experiential Education
Cara Krezek

49

History
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
HISTORY COURSES
HIST 1F00
Looking Forward: Developing Historical Skills
Development of learning and life skills of History majors.
Restriction: permission of the Department
Note: students will be required to participate in an array of workshops designed to promote successful academic habits.
HIST 1F90
Empires and Revolutions
Major empires and revolutions in global history. Introduction to the skills used in analyzing historical evidence.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1F92
Lords of the Sea: British Maritime History, 400-1800
Chronological and thematic examination of the British maritime world 400-1800. Topics include exploration, discovery, migration and settlement, maritime warfare, ship and navigational technologies, economic and cultural exchanges, piracy and shipwrecks, representations of the seas, and maritime mobility, connections and culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1F95
World History since 1914
Major political, social, economic and cultural trends of the 20th century, focusing on developments in Europe and the way they have affected the rest of the world; the decline of Europe in global political and economic terms. Topics include the world wars, the Russian Revolution, fascism, the Holocaust, the Cold War, decolonization and conflict and its resolution in the international, political and social spheres.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1F96
The Americas
Comparative themes in the history of the Americas. Topics may include class, colonialism, culture, economics, gender, labour, political systems, race, religion, revolution and war.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1P50
Co-operative Historical Projects
Introduction to the process, methods and challenges of collaborative research on archival sources.
Seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HICO majors.
HIST 1P90
Life in (and after) hard times: how disasters change societies
Analysis of the impact of disaster and disease on societies from antiquity to the twentieth century. Focus on short- and long-term social, economic and political changes during and after crises. Reflection on how modern societies are similar and different to historical contexts.
Lectures, seminars, 3 hours per week
HIST 1P91
Trendsetting: Global History and Fashion since 1750
Does international fashion and style have a history? Topics include the development of global fashion systems, the business of fashion, shopping and consumption, relation between fashion and identity, fashion and politics, and transformations in historical fashion trends.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1P94
American History Through its Music
Social and political contexts of major topics in the history of the United States as seen through its music.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1P97
The History of Sports in the United States
History of amateur and professional sports in the U.S. from the colonial era to the present. Topics include Native American influences, sport in colonial America, rise of mass spectator sport, Victorian womanhood and sport, the professionalization of sports teams, collegiate sports, racism and sports, the Olympics, impact of media and technology, and the cult of sport celebrity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1P98
Western European Society and Politics to 1800
Social and political themes in the history of Western Europe before 1800.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 1P99
Western European Ideas and Worldviews to 1800
Turning points in European intellectual and cultural life from the Middle Ages through the Age of Revolutions. Topics include major intellectual trends such as the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Scientific Revolution, the Enlightenment and Romanticism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2F00
Great Lakes Maritime and Coastal History
Exploration of the economic, cultural, and environmental histories of the regions' waterway from Indigenous and later European settlement through to the present, tracing interactions between geography, natural resources, and the mobilities of people and materials. Topics include early exploration and commerce, naval warfare, canal systems, maritime communities, watercraft development, staple commodities, port and coastal infrastructure, shipping, and shipwrecks.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: offered online.
HIST 2F20
The History of Britain, 1485-2000
Major social, political, economic and cultural forces that shaped British society in the early modern and modern periods. Focus on daily life in British world and the rise and decline of empire.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2F27
Historical Geographic Information Systems
(also offered as IASC 2F27)
Overview of multiple fields in history in which Geographic Information Systems are applied. Instruction in use of software and provides local history project for students to apply software skills.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Note: labs focus on the history of St. Catharines.
HIST 2F90
Money and Power in the Atlantic World
Explores the practice of history through an examination of the early modern Atlantic World. Emphasis on use of traditional historical practices and digital research tools.
Note: offered online.
HIST 2P00
The Early Modern World
Major characteristics and social, economic, and political developments from 1450-1700. Focus on European expansion and relationships/conflicts with other global societies. Topics include development of major states, intellectual and religious reform, colonial expansion, and socioeconomic inequality.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P01
Colonial Canada
(also offered as CANA 2P01)
Canadian history from the pre-contact period to 1867.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P02
Post-Confederation Canada
(also offered as CANA 2P02)
Canadian history from 1867 to the present.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P03
Early Medieval Britain 400-1000: Celts, Saxons and Vikings
The end of Roman Britain to the Danish invasions and conquest of 1013-16. Migrations, invasions and settlements of Anglo-Saxons, Scots and Vikings; Romano-British and Brittonic society; quest for King Arthur; processes of state formation; heroic society; warfare; conversion to Christianity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P04
The Medieval British Isles, 1000-1485
Medieval Britain from the Danish invasions and conquest of 1013-16 until the Wars of the Roses. Emphasis on Celtic societies; Norman Conquest and impact; kings and kingship; church and monasticism; Anglo-Celtic relations, including the Scottish Wars of Independence and the English conquest of Wales.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P08
Colonial Latin America
(also offered as MARS 2P08)
Introduction to the history of Latin America from pre-Hispanic times through 1810 focusing on the clashes, alliances and negotiations among indigenous peoples, conquistadores, slaves and missionaries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P09
Modern Latin America
Introduction to the history of Latin America from the struggles for independence (1810) to the present. Topics include peasants, immigrants, workers and women in revolution, populism, dictatorship and democracies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P15
Glory and Despair: The United States 1607-1865
United States history and culture from earliest European settlement in North America to the Civil War. Topics include early contact between Europeans and Native Americans, the developing cultures of colonial America, slavery, the American Revolution, the United States Constitution, Jeffersonian America, Jacksonian Democracy, 19th-century social reform, Manifest Destiny and causes of the Civil War.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P16
Ambiguities of Greatness: The United States 1865 to the Present
United States history since the Civil War. Emphasis on Reconstruction, industrialization, immigration, labour and reform, imperialism and the world wars, the Great Depression, Cold War, consumer culture, race and gender, social protest and popular culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P25
Revolutions in Communication
(also offered as IASC 2P25)
Major developments in the history of communication from the invention of writing until the modern information age.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P26
Introduction to Digital History
Emerging methods for teaching and researching history using new technological solutions. Topics include digital mapping and 3D environmental modelling, online source repositories, gaming history, and database construction and management.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P40
French Society and Politics in the 18th Century
Rise of absolutism, war as a stimulus of social reform, the Enlightenment in its social context, comparisons with the developments in Prussia, Austria and Russia, and the origins of the French Revolution.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 2P41.
HIST 2P51
Europe, 1815-1914
Political, social and cultural changes in Europe when it was still dominant globally.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P52
Twentieth-Century Europe
Themes in 20th-century European history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P53
Totalitarian Temptation: The 20th Century
Ideologies and politics of Nazism, Fascism, Communism and other 20th-century European developments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P55
The Culture of War in the Early Modern World
Role of warfare in shaping early modern society, focusing on the experiences of soldiers, women and rural communities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P56
Gender in Modern European History
(also offered as WGST 2P56)
Men's and women's roles and experiences, and changing notions of femininity and masculinity, from the French Revolution to the present day. Intersection of gender with citizenship, nationalism, imperialism, class, work, education and war.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#HIST 2P60
Introduction to the History of Medicine
(also offered as HLSC 2P60)
Changes in cultural knowledge of health and illness; social perceptions of the role of health care professionals and the impact on individual actions and government policy through history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, HLSC, MSCI, PHTH majors and HIST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit or HLSC 1F90.
HIST 2P61
Piracy and Ransoming in African History
Captivity and ransoming refer to the seizure and release of captives in exchange for payment. Why were people seized? How did captives and state agents respond to captivity? What happened when ransom negotiations failed?
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P62
Africa to 1800
Sources available for the study of African history, historical geography, social, political and economic institutions, and the slave trade.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P62.
HIST 2P63
Conflicts and Revolutions in Africa
Select conflicts since 1800. Roots, and the local and global socio-economic and political implications of these conflicts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P63.
HIST 2P64
War and Peace in the Modern Age
Why and how have states gone to war? How do they keep the peace? Military and diplomatic history of the world beginning with the Napoleonic Wars through the 20th century, focusing on the Great Powers. Conflicts and international relations in Asia and Africa.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P65
Late Imperial East Asia
Socio-political change in and international relations between China, Japan, and Korea from the 17th century until the end of World War I.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P66
Twentieth-Century East Asia
Socio-political change in and international relations between China, Japan, and Korea since World War I.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P70
The Middle East, 600 - 1800
(also offered as MARS 2P70)
Major themes in Middle Eastern history from the advent of Islam to 1800 AD Art, culture, religions, migration, minorities, slavery and political developments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P71
Popular Culture in the Modern Middle East
(also offered as COMM 2P71 and PCUL 2P71)
Influence and role of internet, music, cinema and theater, paintings, sports, foods and fashion in the daily life of people in the Middle East, and their historical transformations through modernization and globalization. How class, gender, economy and politics shaped and reshaped the artistic representations and popular culture in the region.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P72
Modern Middle East
Major developments in the Middle East including nationalism, the Arab-Israeli conflict, colonialism, Middle Eastern states, modernity and Islam, the Iranian Revolution, political economy, the Gulf and Iraq-Iran wars, as well as Islam and politics from the Ottoman and Qajar dynasties to the present.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2P75
Heaven and Earth
(also offered as MARS 2P75)
History of science from ancient Greece through Arabic, European Medieval and Renaissance science into the Early Modern period.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: no background in science is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P75.
HIST 2P76
Making Modern Science
Science from the Enlightenment to the atomic bomb including the Industrial Revolution; rise of Big Science; and Darwin, science and religion.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: no background in science is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P76.
*HIST 2P91
Europe's Reformations, 1450-1650
(also offered as MARS 2P91)
Origins, course and consequences of the division of Western Christendom into Protestant and Catholic factions in the 16th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P92
The French Revolution Contested
Debates about the French Revolution and its European impact (1788-1815) focusing on those about its origins, its role in the development of European political culture and its impact on the experience of women and the poor. Topics include the failure of the constitutional monarchy, the impact of war and the counter-revolution.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#HIST 2P93
History of Early Greece
(also offered as CLAS 2P93)
Social and political history of the Greek world from the Bronze Age to 450 BC: Minoans and Mycenaenas, Dark Age, colonizing period, tyrants, rise of Sparta, Persian wars, and Athenian Empire. Readings from Greek historians and documents in translation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 1P91 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST/CLAS 3P03.
#HIST 2P94
History of Classical Greece
(also offered as CLAS 2P94)
Social and political history of the Greek world, 450-323 BC. The great war between Athens and Sparta, rivalry of city-states, rise of national states, Alexander the Great. Readings from Greek historians and documents in translation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLASS 2P93 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST/CLAS 3P04.
HIST 2P96
Early Russia
Russian history from its beginnings in the Kievan period (ninth century) to the end of Catherine the Great's reign (1796).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#HIST 2P97
History of the Early Roman Empire
(also offered as CLAS 2P97 and ITAL 2P97)
History of Rome from the Battle of Actium to the death of Marcus Aurelius (AD 180) emphasizing social and political developments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 2Q96 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST/CLAS/ITAL 3P06.
HIST 2P98
Modern Russia
Politics, society and culture from 19th-century Imperial Russia through the Soviet Union.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2P99
Ideas and Culture before 1850
Major developments in European intellectual and cultural life, such as the Renaissance, the Scientific Revolution, the Enlightenment, Romanticism and the emergence of modern ideologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P99.
*HIST 2Q90
Canada: War and Nationalism
(also offered as CANA 2Q90)
Relation between war, ethnicity, and national identity in Canada in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2Q92
The United States, 1870-1930
Emergence of the United States as a global economic, cultural and military power.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2Q93
Women in North America to 1865
(also offered as WGST 2Q93)
Major themes in the history of women in Canada and the United States: native and European women in New France and British North America; women in the American Revolution; the lives of enslaved women; women and industrialization; women in the west; and social reform.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 2Q94
Women in North America, 1865 to the Present
(also offered as WGST 2Q94)
Major themes in the history of women in Canada and the United States: emancipation; industrialization and immigration; suffrage and social movements; gender, race and ethnicity; women and the two world wars; and feminism in the 1960s and 1970s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#HIST 2Q96
History of the Roman Republic
(also offered as CLAS 2Q96 and ITAL 2Q96)
History of Rome to the Battle of Actium (31 BC), emphasis on social and political developments from the Gracchi to Julius Caesar.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 1P92 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST/CLAS/ITAL 3P05.
*HIST 2Q97
Native-Newcomer Relations in Canada
(also offered as CANA 2Q97)
Relationship between Aboriginal people and the newcomers to their lands from the contact era, to military alliance and trade, treaty-making and reserves, emphasizing the roots of current debates and disputes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2Q98
Everyday Life in Early America
Themes in the day-to-day life of early Americans, from colonial times to the early 19th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 2V90-2V99
Topics in History
Study of a particular area in history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 3F01
Historians and the Craft of History
Historiography, historical methodology and the latest innovative instructional techniques in the discipline of History.
Note: application must be submitted to the Department by April 1st. Students enrolled in this course will act as senior mentors in learning and life skills to junior undergraduates majoring in History.
#HIST 3F50
Reading the Italian Medieval and Renaissance City
(also offered as ITAL 3F50, MARS 3F50 and VISA 3F50)
Exploring key monuments, churches, museums and urban sites. Concept of the city as expressed through art, literature and architecture from Medieval to Baroque times. Historical and geographical influences and factors in shaping the city, its culture and traditions. Cities include Rome, Assisi, Florence and Siena.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST, ITAL, MARS or VISA credit or permission of the Italian Studies course co-ordinator.
Note: offered in Italy during Spring session. Given in English. No knowledge of Italian is needed. Begins in May on campus during the Spring Session (3-4 weeks). Departure for Italy at end of May-beginning of June for a 2-week study tour of Rome, Assisi, Florence and Siena. Students are responsible for travel, accommodation and other expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ITAL (VISA) 2F99 and ITAL (MARS/VISA) 3M50.
#HIST 3F75
Archaeological Practicum in Mediterranean Lands
(also offered as CLAS 3F75)
Field work including excavation, surveys, lectures, demonstrations and study tours of ancient sites, monuments and museums.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25 or permission of the Department.
Note: offered in the Spring or Summer session for four to six weeks of intensive study abroad. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#HIST 3F93
Project Collaborations Across Diverse Programs
(also offered as IASC 3F93)
Interactive media projects carried out by multi-disciplinary teams of students.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities (CDH).
Note: enrollment is limited.
HIST 3M50-3M59
Historical Studies Abroad
Study of the history of a country or region in its own cultural and geographical context.
Lectures/seminar.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, permission of the Department and instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99.
Note: usually offered in the Spring or Summer session with classes at Brock followed by two or three weeks of intensive study abroad. Background preparation and research preceding an intensive study period on location. Students are responsible for travel, accommodation and other expenses.
HIST 3M60-3M65
Experiential Historical Studies
Study of regional history emphasizing experiential learning.
Lectures, workshop, field trip.
Restriction: permission of the instructor or Department.
Note: this intensive study course will usually be offered in the Spring or Summer session for 3 or 4 weeks. Background preparation and research preceding an intensive study period on location. Students are responsible for field expenses.
*HIST 3M60
2021-2022: Field School in Local Historical Archaeology
(also offered as CLAS 3M60)
Archaeological field methods, including but not limited to site survey, excavation, recording and laboratory procedures. Material culture, historic landscapes and archival sources.
Lectures, workshop, field trip, 5 weeks.
Restriction: permission of the instructor or Department.
Note: field site is a local shipyard occupied between 1827 and 1901. Materials fee required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*HIST 3M61
2021-2022: Local Historical Archaeology
(also offered as CLAS 3M61)
Practice of archaeology within local historic environments, with a focus on Niagara. Multidisciplinary approaches to human-landscape interaction, connecting material culture, archival sources, and the natural and built environment.
Offered online.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
HIST 3P00
Ideas and Culture since 1800
Intellectual and cultural developments in Europe and the Americas during the 19th and 20th centuries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 3P00.
HIST 3P01
Britain and the World, 1500 - 1960
Politics of and resistance to British colonization and expansion from 1500 to 1960. Case studies from the earliest 'plantations' in Ireland to modern examples in India, the Middle East, and west and east Africa.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2F20 recommended.
HIST 3P02
Introduction to Food History
Food from early agriculture through the emergence of regional cuisines, the dietary effects of the Columbian exchange and early modern trading empires to the development of food preservation technologies and modern diets.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the Instructor.
HIST 3P07
Growing Up: Childhood and Youth Since 1800
Popular, legal, medical, and professional conceptions of childhood and child-rearing in the 19th and early 20th centuries, focusing on how ethnicity, gender, religion, class and disability influence the experience and understanding of children and young people in the West.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P10
African American History, 1619 - 1877
History of African Americans struggle for freedom, from the horrors of the Transatlantic Slave Trade to emancipation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)B/Ed (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1 (alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the Instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 3P52.
HIST 3P11
African American History, 1877 - present
History of African Americans struggle for equality, from their fight against segregation laws to the Black Lives Matter campaign.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)B/Ed (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha) 90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the Instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 3P52.
HIST 3P15
American Enlightenment
Intellectual and cultural history of the thirteen colonies and the early republic. Origins, manifestation and decline of the Enlightenment as seen through the life and writings of seminal American thinkers and less well-known figures. Transatlantic focus on dissemination of ideas and their impact.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P15 recommended.
HIST 3P16
The American Revolution
What was the American Revolution? Historical and historiographical points of view, combining the perspectives of intellectual, political, cultural, military and social history.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P15 recommended.
HIST 3P18
Modern American Popular Culture
Replacement of Victorian ideals with modern popular culture in the 20th century. Multidisciplinary view of American popular culture through the media of literature, art, film and music.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P16 recommended.
HIST 3P19
Histories of Crime and Violence
Violence as a significant factor from human prehistory through the early modern period. Emphasis on class and gender.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
HIST 3P21
Race, Class and Gender in Latin America
How questions of race or ethnicity, class and gender affect the way we understand the construction of a specific modern Latin American nation or region.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P08 and 2P09 recommended.
*HIST 3P30
The Viking Age
(also offered as MARS 3P30)
Vikings from their Scandinavian homelands as they raid, trade and settle throughout Europe and the North Atlantic, convert to Christianity, establish new kingdoms and eventually assimilate into medieval Christendom.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), MARS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P31
The Historian's Toolbox
Methods and tools that can be applied in research on most historical subjects. Emphasizes the use of primary sources, digital tools and varieties of historical inquiry.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P33
Imagining the Past: Introduction to Historiography
Historical thinking, using major examples of historiography from the ancient world until the present.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P35
North America's First Nations
Topics in the history of North American Aboriginal peoples.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: one of HIST 2P01, 2P02, 2P15, 2P16 is recommended.
#HIST 3P36
Digital Innovations: History and Computing I
(also offered as CLAS 3P36 and IASC 3P36)
Explores innovative, digital methods historians are using to research, express and teach the past.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: practical component features introduction to 3D modelling.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST (CLAS/IASC) 3F31.
#HIST 3P37
Digital Innovations: History and Computing II
(also offered as CLAS 3P37 and IASC 3P37)
Surveys ways historians have used computation to transform our understanding of the past.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: practical component features introduction to more advanced methods for 3D modelling.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST (CLAS/IASC) 3F31.
HIST 3P45
United States Foreign Policy Since 1945
United States foreign policy during the Cold War era including the rise to superpower status, the search for global economic hegemony, the national security state, cultural diplomacy, covert operations and military intervention.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P16 recommended.
*HIST 3P48
Wealth, Work and Power in the United States
(also offered as LABR 3P48)
Business, labour and the state in U.S. history, including the evolution of capitalism from home manufacture to mass production to the service sector, the rise of the modern corporation, changing nature of work, sexual and racial divisions of labour, public policy, class conflict, welfare capitalism, the Great Depression and New Deal, business and war, deindustrialization, globalization and free trade.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), LABR (single or combined) majors and HIST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P16 recommended.
HIST 3P55
London, Paris, Berlin: History Through the Urban Landscape
Comparative history of capital cities of Britain, France and Germany from 1900 to the present. Themes include industrialization and urbanization, urban, class and gender identities, history and memory in the urban landscape, and cities at war.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P56
Weimar Germany, 1918-1933
Rise and fall of Germany's first republic emphasizing the political effects of the social and cultural developments of the interwar period. Topics include the 'New Woman' and gender relations; Berlin cabaret; Brecht; Bauhaus; art, literature, cinema, modernity and Nazism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P52 and/or 2P53 recommended.
HIST 3P57
Living with the Enemy: The History of World War II Occupation in Europe
Axis occupation policies in Europe and the daily experiences and reactions of the occupied from 1939 -1945. Topics include resistance, collaboration, economic exploitation, genocide and crimes against humanity, the pillaging of cultural artifacts, post-war justice, retribution, and memory.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P58
The History of Modern East-Central Europe
Examination of the diverse peoples inhabiting the lands between the German and Russian worlds from the late 18th century to the present. Topics include external political domination of the region, the struggle for national independence, treatment of minorities, social and economic 'backwardness', the 'bloodlands' of World War II, the consequences of Communist rule, and the challenges of European integration.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P59
History of Terrorism:Threat, Spin and Struggle
Evolution of pre-modern and especially modern forms of terrorism, focusing on definitions, origins, tactics and objectives, counter-terrorism, propaganda, and terrorisms consequences. Global developments, emphasizing Europe.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 3P60
The World of Genghis Khan: Inner Asia since 500 BC
History of Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang. Political, economic, social and cultural topics. Emphasis on the nomadic encounter with the settled world (China, Russia), including the medieval nomadic invasions, the Great Game and nationalistic policies in the 20th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and HIST minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), MARS (single or combined) majors and HIST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: seminars will include films and primary sources (in translation). HIST 2P96 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 3P60
#HIST 3P61
Gender and Society in Ancient Mediterranean
(also offered as CLAS 3P61 and WGST 3P61)
Ancient constructions of femininity and masculinity and their relationship to the social, political and legal systems of the Greco-Roman world. Cultural regions vary.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of HIST 1P98, 1P99, CLAS 1P91, 1P92, 2P61, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
*HIST 3P63
Western Diasporas In the Ancient and Modern Eras
(also offered as CLAS 3P63)
Reception, presence and experience of migrant and immigrant peoples as cultural, religious and ethnic minorities in both ancient and modern times.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 3P64
African Migration, Displacement & Diaspora
African migration (forced and voluntary) experience. Topics may include migration origins, journeys of refugees attempting to cross state/cultural borders, modes of incorporation, racism, cultural/identity strategies, the political-economic relationship between African migrants and their hosts, and the ideas of 'home' and 'abroad.'
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P61, 2P62 or 2P63 recommended.
#HIST 3P65
Ancient Law in the Near Eastern and Mediterranean Lands
(also offered as CLAS 3P65)
Principal codified legal corpora of the ancient world, including Mesopotamia, the Levant (Land of Israel), Greece and Rome.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
HIST 3P66
African Economic History
Africa, urbanization and globalization including economic and population growth, and rising economic inequality. Topics include the changing nature of global trade, development assistance, non-governmental organizations, and the impact of new development partners such as China.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P61, 2P62 or 2P63 recommended.
HIST 3P67
Environment and Development in Africa
African development from a historical perspective. Politics of environments and environment-development linkages in Africa. Topics include the history of human-environment relations--the exploitation of the natural environment, patterns of extraction and trade, extractive economies, plantation agriculture, conservation, tourism, foreign investments and the 'land grab', bioprospecting and urban ecologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST(single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the Instructor.
HIST 3P74
Canadian Immigration and Ethnic History
Immigrants, immigration movements, problems of adjustment and government policies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P01 or 2P02 recommended.
*HIST 3P75
Canadian Labour History
(also offered as LABR 3P75)
Canadian workers and the labour movement from the mid-19th century to the present, combining studies of trade unions with the broader context of the social, community and political life of workers. How gender and race/ethnicity have shaped the working class experience.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), LABR (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P02 recommended.
HIST 3P76
Canadian Regional History
Selected themes in the history of Canada's regions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P02 recommended.
HIST 3P77
The Canadian West
The fur trade era when Aboriginal cultures and economies dominated, through the era of mass immigration, to the Depression and its legacy of social, political and medical innovation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P02 recommended.
Students will not receive earned credit for HIST 3P77 if HIST 3P76 has been successfully completed.
HIST 3P81
History of Technology
The role of machines and technology in shaping Western culture from the Industrial Revolution to the Internet; developments in power, information, communication, transportation and military technologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#HIST 3P82
A History of Disability Technologies
(also offered as ADST 3P82)
Cultural, scientific and medical roots of disability technologies from 1850 to the present. Historical examination of how ability technologies reveal individual experiences with disability as well as related notions of citizenship, gender, sexuality, identity and accessibility.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 3P85
Minorities of the Middle East
Politics of modern Middle Eastern states; the formation of national identity; the changes in the position of ethnic and religious minorities; Christians, Jews and Muslims and their religious sectarians; slavery and gender.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P86
Cultures and Societies of the Middle East
European imperialism, migration and diaspora, nomads and pastoralists, marriage, national identity, Muslims and non-Muslim communities, urban life, ethnic and religious groups.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P87
The American West
Colonial rivalries and ethnic struggles in the settlement of the American West until the present day.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P15 or 2P16 recommended.
HIST 3P88
Women and Gender in China
Constructs of women, gender and sexuality in China from imperial period to Mao era. Norms, religions, customs, practices and legends in shaping womens life, and changing status, gender relations and sexuality.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
HIST 3P89
Traditional Chinese World: People and Culture
Social and cultural history of China from the first empire to the early 20th century. Cultural values and customs, folk religion, family, kinship and gentry, food, medicine, women and gender, lifestyle and regional differences, and the impact of the physical environment.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P65 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 3P89.
HIST 3P90
The Rise and Fall of the Russian Empire
The Russian empire and its components over the past 500 years. Topics include expansion, nationalities, diplomacy and the politics of dissolution in the post-Soviet era.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P96 or 2P98 recommended.
HIST 3P91
Epidemics and Ideas: History of Medicine and Disease
Impact of race, class and gender in the experience of health and healing from early contact to the 20th century in Canadian society.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P92
The Church Besieged: Religion in North America after 1850
Real and perceived challenges to Christian churches in North America, late 19th century to modern period. Focus on fundamentalist belief and political engagement, and the emergence of new religious movements in response to, or inspired by, global conflict, feminism, socialism and scientific discovery.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: HIST 2P16 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 3P09.
HIST 3P93
Fraternalism and the Freemasons
Fraternalism as a political, social and cultural force from the period of the Enlightenment until the end of the 19th century. Emphasis on development of public cultures, the spread of Empire, as well as the shaping and expression of gender norms, through participation in the brotherhood.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P94
Historians and the Age of Religious Wars and Absolutism, 1559-1715
Historians' approaches to religious division in continental Europe. Political, religious and social developments in France with comparisons to conflict in other European countries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours) /BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P95
God's Country? Religion in North America before 1850
Influence of religious practices and beliefs on social and political life in North America from contact to 1850. Emphasis on popular religious activity outside of institutional churches and how belief shaped cultural experiences, gender relations and racial politics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P01 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 3P08.
#HIST 3P96
Medieval and Early Modern Christianity
(also offered as MARS 3P96)
Interdisciplinary study of the continuities and discontinuities in the history of the Christian Church from the onset of the Middle Ages to the eve of the Protestant reformations. Examination of ecclesiastical authority, Christianity's interactions with Judaism and Islam, changing social structures, monastic reforms, the Crusades, magic, science, religion, the papacy, and the cult of saints and devotion to relics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#HIST 3P97
The World of the Renaissance and Beyond
(also offered as MARS 3P97)
Interdisciplinary study of the primary texts relative to the European Renaissance and global questions that reshape the world, emphasizing the historical, cultural and intellectual legacies of the Renaissance, including literature, religion, philosophy, science, medicine and the history of exploration.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*HIST 3P98
French Colonial Canada
(also offered as CANA 3P98)
"French Canada" and Indigenous peoples in the context of the Atlantic World in the era of settler colonialism, 1604-1763.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3P99
The Challenge to Social Order in 18th-Century England
The basis of Hanoverian stability and the threat to it from political factionalism, popular dissent and economic upheaval.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2F20 recommended.
#HIST 3Q91
Renaissance Perceptions of Indigenous Cultures
(also offered as MARS 3Q91 and SPAN 3Q91)
Perceptions and views of indigenous American peoples and civilizations in Renaissance Europe, drawing from written accounts, histories of the Indies, and visual representations of Incas, Aztecs and Mayans.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST, MARS, SPAN credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
#HIST 3Q92
Moors, New Christians and Renegades
(also offered as MARS 3Q92 and SPAN 3Q92)
Contesting identity categories resulting from exchanges and interactions of Christians and Muslims in the early modern Mediterranean world, through the study of historical and fictional primary sources.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST, MARS or SPAN credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
HIST 3Q94
Revolution in Latin America
Social, economic and intellectual roots of revolution in Mexico and Central America. Comparison of how revolutionary leaders used class, race and gender to recruit allies or isolate enemies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P08 and/or 2P09 recommended.
*HIST 3Q96
The Vikings and the Historians
(also offered as MARS 3Q96)
Select problems and debates in Viking studies and the medieval evidence on which they are based.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and MARS majors and minors until date specified in the Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 3P30 is strongly recommended.
HIST 3Q97
History and the North American Environment
Overview of human interaction with nature in North America; nature and natural resources as they shape patterns of human life; how attitudes toward nature shape cultural and political life; the consequences of human alterations of the natural world for natural and human communities.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: one of HIST 2P01, 2P02, 2P15, 2P16 recommended.
HIST 3Q98
Environment and History in the Early Modern World
Role of the environment in shaping human societies from the 14th to the 18th centuries. Emphasis on feedback between built and natural environments. Comparison of European and non-European societies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 3Q99
The Sixties
Social movements and social change in the United States in the 1960s; student, civil rights, antiwar, women's and other forms of activism; global context; causes and consequences of '60s revolts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P16 recommended.
HIST 3V90-3V94
Topics in Canadian History
Topics in Canadian History.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 2P91, 2P92, one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and two HIST credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P01 or 2P02 recommended.
*HIST 4F00
Voices from the Past: Oral History
(also offered as CANA 4F00)
Oral history as a source for historical research. Focus on methods and best practices including: ethics; community engagement and shared authority; memory, life-story and digital story-telling; interviewing; recording, archiving and digitization; copyright. Creation of an oral history collection for Brock's Special Collections.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), and CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department).
#HIST 4P00
Literature of the English Revolution
(also offered as ENGL 4P00)
Writings from the 1640s to the Restoration, including Areopagitica, Eikon Basilike, female prophecy and Agreement of the People, from literary, critical, historical and theoretical perspectives.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ECUL, ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
#HIST 4P01
Sources and Methods of Medieval and Renaissance Studies
(also offered as ENGL 4P01 and MARS 4P01)
Exploration of a range of source materials used to address inquiries into Medieval and Renaissance cultural forms and societies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), ENCW, ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined) and MARS majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: students in other disciplines may register with permission of the instructor and Director.
HIST 4P02
Early Modern Cops and Robbers
Crime and policing in early modern Europe. Readings in primary and secondary sources. Focus on class, gender and race in development of judicial systems. Major trends in historiography of crime and policing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)BED (Intermediate/Senior) and CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P07
Topics in Religious Studies
Investigation of the manner in which religious belief and practice mediate gender, class, race, culture, politics, and scientific conviction in the West. Topics may include capital punishment, spiritualism, evolution, prohibition, global conflict, persecution, and secularization.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/Bed (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval in year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HIST 4V07.
HIST 4P08
Slavery in Africa
Historiography of African slavery from 1400 to the present. Specificities of African slavery, family, women and children, urban/rural, African/Muslim/Euro-American factors, resistance, emancipation and manumission of slaves, related forms of unfree labour.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P09
The American Ghetto
Formation of ethnic and racial ghettos in the United States from the early 19th century until today. Topics include the push/pull factors that affected the formation of ghettos and their cultural life, focusing on immigrant groups such as the Irish, Jews, Mexicans and Eastern Europeans as well as African Americans.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
*HIST 4P10
History in the Field: Ontario and the War of 1812
(also offered as CANA 4P10)
Social, cultural, political and economic impact of the War of 1812 in southern Ontario, emphasizing commemoration and public history. Examinations of historic sites, battle fields, and material artifacts will supplement study of historical and historiographical texts; field research at local museums, archives and historic sites.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 2P01 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are responsible for travel and other expenses.
*HIST 4P11
State and Society in Colonial Canada
(also offered as CANA 4P11)
Major cultural and political themes in Canadian colonial history from the British conquest of Acadia to the Confederation of the colonies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and CANA majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P18
Women and Gender in African History
Women's changing status and opportunities in the social, political and economic structures of African states and polities from early times to the present. Varieties of social constructions of gender and gender relationships with the changing historical contexts of state formation, trade, religion, imperialism and popular culture.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P22
Africa in World History
The African encounter with the wider world, focusing on African contacts with Arabs and Europeans, global migrations, imperialism and African response, the world wars and decolonization.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: HIST 2P62 or 2P63 recommended
HIST 4P25
Race, Ethnicity and Immigration in the United States
Experiences of various ethnic groups in the development of the United States from the 19th century to present.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P26
Topics in Latin American History
Major themes in political, social, economic and cultural history focusing on race, class, gender, spirituality and memory, their meanings in context, and their interaction within institutional frameworks. Sources, their analysis and interpretation, and historiographical traditions.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: HIST 2P08 and/or 2P09 recommended.
HIST 4P29
Wallace, Bruce and the Wars of Scotland
Wars of Independence. Who these men were, what they fought for and why they remain prominent figures in Scottish history and legend.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P33
The United States and the Cold War
The Cold War through such themes as atomic science, the Red Scare, popular culture, sex and gender, civil rights and Third World nationalism.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P35
Witchcraft Episodes in Britain and America, 1500-1700
Persecution for witchcraft within the context of religious change, socio-economic friction and gender relations. Comparative focus on the nature of witchcraft episodes in England, Scotland and New England.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P36
American Political Ideas, 1760-1805
American political ideas and the historiography of the Founding Era.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P37
Cultures of Consumption in the British World
Major social, cultural and economic themes in the history of consumption in Britain from 1750. Global movement of consumer goods across the British world, from imperial sites of production to Britons homes. Case studies of specific commodities central to international trade networks and popular amongst British consumers.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P38
The Russian Revolution
Causes of the Romanov dynasty's collapse and its replacement by Bolshevism.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: HIST 2P98 recommended.
HIST 4P39
Gender and Empire in the British World
History of gender and empire in the British World from 1750, focusing on race and intimacy, sexuality and power, colonial medicine and bodies, and the colonial archive.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P41
The Holocaust
Origins, nature and legacy of the Holocaust.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P42
Nazi Germany
Rise of Hitler and the Third Reich, Nazification of German society, culture and the ecomomy, war, postwar denazification, and coming to terms with the Nazi past focusing on historiography. Topics include race, class and gender, science and technology, Jewish policy and the Holocaust, occupied Europe, resistance and collaboration, and politics of memory and commemoration.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P43
Censorship: A Comparative Approach
Comparison of attitudes and approaches to censorship in a number of contexts including the Inquisition, the English Civil War, absolute monarchy, the French Revolution and the totalitarian state between the Middle Ages and the 20th century.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P44
The French Revolution
The intersection of the ideals of the French revolutionaries with late 18th-century views about social hierarchy, gender, property and race. Topics include the collapse of absolute monarchy, the origins of the important ideals of the revolutionaries and the obstacles faced in their implementation.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: HIST 2P92 recommended.
HIST 4P46
Food and Drink: Society, Science and Economy
Exploration of major topics connecting food, culture, science, agriculture, economic development and politics from the early modern era to the 20th century.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P47
Material Cultures of Science and Technology
Material cultures approaches to history; role of artifacts in the history of science and technology; how historians interpret objects and non-traditional material sources and interpret their historical and social significance.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
*HIST 4P48
Science, Technology and Gender
(also offered as WGST 4P48)
Science and technology as shaped by cultural perceptions of gender. How has gender influenced ideas of nature, determined scientific inquiry and influenced the path of technological innovation?
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WGST (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
HIST 4P49
Science and 19th-Century Culture
Social and cultural history of 19th-century science and technology, focusing on Victorian Britain. How railways, evolutionary theory, industrialization and secularization changed people's lives and their perception of the world.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: no background in science is required.
HIST 4P50
Directed Research
Directed research on a selected topic.
Restriction: permission of the instructor and the Department.
Note: application form including a research proposal must be submitted by March 31 before entering year 4.
HIST 4P51
Digital History Research Seminar
Designing, developing and executing a digital history research project using cutting-edge methods.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor and the Department.
Note: topics and materials will be chosen in consultation with the instructor. Prior experience with digital research methods is recommended.
HIST 4P53
Nations and Nationalism in Modern Europe
Evolution of European nations, nationalisms and national identities over the course of the modern era. Major theories of nationalism, conflicting concepts of the nation, historiographical controversies and recent research.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P55
Social History of the Renaissance
Lived experiences of daily life, including childhood and family life, crime and violence, religion, and religious reform.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: HIST 2P99 recommended.
HIST 4P56
Intellectuals in Revolutionary China
Major themes in the history of Chinese intellectuals in the 20th century, especially their involvement in the Communist revolution and the development of the People's Republic of China.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: HIST 2P66 recommended.
HIST 4P57
China under Communist Rule
Major features and sociopolitical life of China under the Communists; political campaigns, persecutions, economic adventures, and social upheavals. China after Mao and the transformation to 'autocratic capitalism' and the 'rise of China'.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P59
Women of the Middle East
The significance of religion, culture, economy and politics in shaping the role of women and their contributions to modern Middle Eastern societies. The changing status of Middle Eastern women, and their images in tradition and Islamic law as well as Western literature.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P61
Histories of the End: Varieties of Apocalypticism
The history of apocalyptic thought and millenarian movements studied from a comparative perspective.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P62
Religious Radicalism
Religious dissent and nonconformity examined using the principles of inquiry-based learning.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P64
Slavery in the Middle East
Comparative analysis of the institution of slavery in the Middle East since 1800. Political, economic, social and legal ideologies for the organization of the slave trade, the abolition of slavery and the emancipation of slaves.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P65
First Nations in Modern Canada
History of Aboriginal people in Canada including colonialism, interactions with missionaries, treaties and Aboriginal sovereignty, education and residential schools, health and health care policies, activism, oral narratives, land claims and resource exploitation.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: HIST 2Q97 recommended.
HIST 4P67
The World We Have Lost: Comparative Rural History
Major patterns of international rural history, emphasizing cultural, political and social questions.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
HIST 4P70
Seminar in Academic Editing and Publishing
Faculty guidance in managing, editing and producing the Brock University Historical Society's undergraduate journal The General.
Restriction: permission of the instructor and the Department.
HIST 4P90
Advanced Seminar
Graduate level seminar on a selected topic.
Restriction: permission of the instructor and the Department.
HIST 4P99
Honours Tutorial
Directed reading in a selected field.
Restriction: permission of the instructor and the Department.
Note: application form including a research proposal must be submitted by March 31 before entering year 4.
HIST 4V00-4V05
Themes in Literature and History
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) until date specified in Registration guide and then open to other students with permission of the Department.
HIST 4V06-4V79
Topics in History
Studies of selected problems in different eras of Canadian, American and European history. Topics studied in any given year will focus on a particular theme.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) until date specified in Registration guide and then open to other students with permission of the Department.
CO-OP COURSES
HIST 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
HIST 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
HIST 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
HIST 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional fourth co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
HIST 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional fifth co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
HIST 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentation, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
HIST 0N97
Co-op Leadership Workshop
Provides students with skills in interpersonal communication, conflict management and problem solving, group work and leadership strengths and styles.
Seminar, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students or permission of the Co-ordinator of the Foundations in Leadership Series.
Note: students will be charged a fee for supplies. Students who complete this course will achieve Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum certification in the Foundations in Leadership Professional Development Series.
HIST 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HIST 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
HIST 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HIST 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
HIST 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HIST 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
HIST 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HIST 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
HIST 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to HIST Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): HIST 0N90.
Corequisite(s): HIST 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING COURSE
*HIST 3F02
Making History in Niagara
(also offered as CANA 3F02)
Research, design and presentation of a proposal for a public history project, using local archives, including Brock Special Collections. Projects may include: special exhibits at local museums, historical societies; libraries; historical information plaques; monuments/ memorials; brochures/ pamphlets; digital/on line exhibits; live performances or other artistic productions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Administrative Co-ordinator
Frances Meffe
905-688-5550, extension 3500
573 Glenridge 257
brocku.ca/history
Historians explore changes in past societies, cultures and peoples. They examine cultural, artistic, political, economic, intellectual, social, military and national history. Their interests range from the history of individuals and local communities to studies of nations and international relations. They analyse the causes and consequences of significant change over time. They seek to illuminate the past.
The study of history involves surveying and gathering evidence and evaluating, interpreting and refining it by constructing clear and logical arguments on the basis of that evidence.
Within the requirements indicated under the Honours program and Pass program, the Department allows students considerable flexibility in the selection of HIST courses.
To assist students in refining their analytical and critical skills, weekly seminars are a crucial part of every history course. In many courses, individual students are given the responsibility of organizing and leading discussions on particular topics.
The Department of History recommends combining History with other disciplines, such as Child and Youth Studies, Classics, Economics, English Language and Literature, Geography, Labour Studies, Philosophy, Political Science, Psychology, Sociology, Women's and Gender Studies.
To qualify for admission to year 4 (honours), students must have a minimum 70 major average and approval of the Department. The application deadline is March 1 of the preceding academic year. Students wishing to apply for admission must meet with the Humanities Academic Adviser prior to the application deadline. See the Department for additional information.

50

Hispanic and Latin American Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
PORTUGUESE COURSES
PORT 1F00
Introductory Portuguese Language
Foundations of grammar from a functional perspective through a communicative approach to language learning. Selected texts for practical insights into the customs and cultural contexts of the contemporary Portuguese-speaking world.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: for students with no background in Portuguese. Students who have taken a previous Portuguese course in high school will not be permitted to take this course. Offered as a blended format.
PORT 1F90
Intermediate Portuguese Language
Review of Portuguese grammar with particular emphasis on written and oral practice. Reading literary and cultural texts for language practice as well as further explore practical insights into the customs and cultural contexts of the contemporary Portuguese-speaking world.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PORT 1F00. One or more high school Portuguese credits or permission of instructor.
Note: for students with some background in Portuguese. Offered as a blended format.
SPANISH COURSES
SPAN 1F00
Introductory Spanish Language
Intensive study of Spanish with oral, written and reading practice. Selected readings and multimedia materials for practical insights into the customs and cultural contexts of the contemporary Spanish-speaking world.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: for students with no background in the language. Closed to heritage and native speakers of Spanish. Students who have taken a previous Spanish course in high school will not be permitted to take this course. Offered as a blended format.
SPAN 1F90
Intermediate Spanish Language
Intensive Spanish grammar review. Strengthens oral and written skills and further explores literary and cultural modes of expression from the Spanish-speaking world.
Lectures, tutorial; 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1F00; one or more high school Spanish credits or permission of  instructor.
Note: offered as blended format.
SPAN 1P95
Conquest and Colonization
Introduction to Ancient American and Iberian civilizations and early Latin America through critical study of European colonialism and contestatory colonial agencies of Africans, Creoles, Native Americans, Mestizos and Europeans.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 1P95.
SPAN 2P10
Latin American Cultures Since Independence
Social, political and cultural history of the Latin American nations through text and images. Topics include cultural hybridization and identity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P10.
SPAN 2P11
Cultures of Spain and Portugal
Formation of Iberian cultures to modern times, in the contexts of social, political, religious, intellectual, literary, and artistic themes and developments. Topics include multicultural and cross-cultural influences, maritime explorations, globalization, diasporic identities, traditions, and innovations, as a reflection of Iberian society in different historical periods. Use of print and visual media texts.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Spanish and/or Portuguese required. Offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P11.
SPAN 2P19
Applied Language: Review and Practice
Comprehensive grammar review emphasizing language structure, style and critical thinking through print and visual media texts.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered as a blended format. Experiential opportunities and Community Service Learning component for interested students.
SPAN 2P20
Survey of Literary and Cultural Texts
Further study of major literary and cultural  movements from their origins to contemporary times. Focus on research methods, interpretation, and critical writing skills.
Lectures/seminar; 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered as a blended format. Experiential opportunities and Community Service Learning component for interested students.
#SPAN 2P87
Blood, Genealogy and Identity in Medieval and Early Modern Spain
(also offered as MARS 2P87)
Significance of genealogy and blood (ie. limpieza de sangre or blood purity statues), in the shaping of categories and forms of identification pertaining to Jewish, Muslim and Christian populations, and emerging New Christian groups like Conversos and Moriscos.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
SPAN 2P90
Culture and Nationhood in the Hispanic World
Interrelation of culture(s) and conceptions of nationhood within the framework of Spain-Latin American dynamics. Topics include interactions of European, Creole, Indigenous and African peoples; official and unofficial management of multiethnic and multicultural societies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 2P92
Afro-Latino Narratives
The historical and cultural contributions of Africans and Afro-descendants in Latin America, focusing on the multifaceted "narratives" of and about Afro-Latinos, from the colonial period to present-day.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: given in English.
#SPAN 2P95
Latin American and Iberian Film
(also offered as FILM 2P95)
Iberian and Latin American film representations of nationality, ethnicity, gender, religion, exile/migration and politics. Emphasis on national and transnational cultural and socio-political contexts and on the study of national/regional cinema movements. Delivered online.
Note: Spanish and Portuguese language films with English subtitles. Given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPAN 2P82 and INTC 2P95.
SPAN 2P96
Indigenous Latin America
Interdisciplinary approach to the study of Indigenous peoples, languages, cultures and narrative traditions of Portuguese and Spanish-speaking Americas, focusing on the significance of storytelling, orality's role, and other narrative forms in the transmission of language and culture in the construction of collective memory. Effects of globalization, digital media, and technology on these languages and cultures.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours a week. Online delivery.
Restriction: permission of instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Spanish and/or Portuguese required.  Offered online.
SPAN 2V90-2V99
Culture in Spanish- and Portuguese-Speaking Regions
Culture of a country or region in its geographical context. Background preparation research preceding an intensive study period on location. Course content will vary, depending on research interest of instructor.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
SPAN 3F80
Im/migrant and Community Outreach Internship
Examination of the im/migrant, refugee and newcomer experience in relation to socio-political, cultural and linguistic power dynamics. Promotes community engagement with career-oriented internship experience.
Lectures, 1 hour per week; 60 experience hours.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above. Permission of the instructor.
Note: offered in the Spring/Summer session. Students will be placed with community organizations and agencies. Placement abroad may be available. Students will be required to provide their own transportation and prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation in consultation with professor. Open to students interested in pursuing various internships in areas of intercultural relations and international professionalization in various fields depending on the student's linguistic background. May be offered as a blended format.
SPAN 3P84
Diaspora Communities
Interdisciplinary survey of Portuguese and Spanish communities in and outside US and Canada as expressed in written and/or oral literary texts; artistic representations. Topics may include legacy of the diasporas, role of the other, notion of foreignness, issues of language, identity, exile, assimilation and acculturation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 3P84.
SPAN 3P85
Indigenous and Mestizo Narratives
Culture and knowledge contribution of indigenous and mestizo intellectuals in colonial Latin America, through the study of written records, non-alphabetic media, oral traditions, pictographic and other visual media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 and 2P20 or permission of instructor.
SPAN 3P90
Early Modern Spanish Literature and Culture
Themes and trends in 16th- and 17th-century Spanish drama, prose and poetry, evolution of a national theatre, picaresque, and birth of the modern novel. Film adaptations of key texts to aid comprehension and to consider performative culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 and 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 3P93
Advanced Language and Discourse
Study of the Spanish language through the analysis of various genres of texts, stylistics and discursive features. Integration of literature, culture and film. Focus on critical thinking, interpretation and critical discourse analysis.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 3P94
Iberian Narrative
Themes and narrative techniques that characterize the works of major 20th-century authors as well as contemporary Spanish and Portuguese authors.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 or 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 3P95
Contemporary Latin American Narrative
Multidisciplinary approach (historical, sociological, psychological, mythical) to the study of texts from different cultures and genres.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 or 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 3P97
Modern Spanish Literature and Culture
Crises of national identity in poetry and narrative; literary theories dealing with genre, conventions of romanticism, naturalism, realism in context of Iberian culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 and 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 3P98
Chronicle and Testimonial Writing
Historiography, collective memory versus official history, relation of past to future, oral history and its transcription into testimonial literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 or 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 3P99
Hispanic Linguistics
Overview of major trends and issues in Spanish and Portuguese linguistics. Topics may include language variation and change, historical linguistics, language contact, dialectology, sociolinguistics, text linguistics. Emphasis on linguistic aspects and theory-driven approaches.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN credit numbered 2(alpha) or above, and/or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
*SPAN 3Q91
Renaissance Perceptions of Indigenous Cultures
(also offered as HIST 3Q91 and MARS 3Q91)
Perceptions and views of indigenous American peoples and civilizations in Renaissance Europe, drawing from written accounts, histories of the Indies, and visual representations of Incas, Aztecs and Mayans.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN, HIST or MARS credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
#SPAN 3Q92
Moors, New Christians and Renegades
(also offered as HIST 3Q92 and MARS 3Q92)
Contesting identity categories resulting from exchanges and interactions of Christians and Muslims in the early modern Mediterranean world, through the study of historical and fictional primary sources.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN, HIST or MARS credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
SPAN 4F80
Im/migrant and Community Outreach Research and Internship
Advanced research in the im/migrant, refugee and newcomer experience by expanding on the theme of socio-political, cultural and linguistic power dynamics. Promotes community engagement with career-oriented internship experience.
Lectures, 1 hour per week; 60 volunteer/experience hours.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 3F80 or permission of instructor.
Note: offered in Spring/Summer session. Students will be placed with community organizations and agencies. Placement abroad may be available. Students will be required to provide their own transportation and prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report, a major research paper and receive a successful work term performance evaluation in consultation with professor. Open to students interested in pursuing various internships in areas of intercultural relations and international professionalization in various fields depending on the student's linguistic background.
SPAN 4F99
Honours Thesis
Research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty adviser.
Restriction: open to SPAN majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average, a minimum 70 percent overall average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of instructor.
Note: students contemplating a thesis should consult the instructor at the end of year 3 and must submit a detailed proposal in writing before May 15 prior to entering year 4.
*SPAN 4P01
Latin American Women's Perspectives
(also offered as WGST 4P01)
Cultural production of Latin American women and their impact on society through a wide selection of media.
Lectures, seminar 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 4P01.
SPAN 4P04
Translation: Applications
Translation theory and its applications in Spanish to English to Spanish. Lexical, morphological, syntactic and semantic interrelation between source text and target text; application of translation methodologies to a variety of texts in various fields.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above, or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 4P10
Readings in Medieval Iberian Narrative
Development of narrative traditions through the early 15th century and their historical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 or 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
SPAN 4P15
Imagining Identity in the Early Modern Hispanic World
Religious, political and cultural discourses employed in the construction of identities in the Hispanic world. May include gendered identities, definitions of Spanish Christian identity. Creole identities and counter identities, such as Converso, Morisco and Mestizo.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): SPAN 2P19 and 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
*SPAN 4P60
Women in Hispanic Literature: Witches, Vampires and Virgins
(also offered as WGST 4P60)
Depiction of women as monstrous or deviant. Authors include Carmen Boullosa, Alejandra Pizarnik and Rosario Ferr. Feminist literary theory of alterity (otherness).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 4P60.
SPAN 4P64
Island Narratives: Re-imagining Ibero-American Insular Worlds
Multidisciplinary approach to the study of the island imaginary. Concepts of insular narrative spaces and the Other, language, literature and cultural translatability, oral storytelling tradition, and emerging and emergent narrative identities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPAN 4V64 and INTC 4P64.
SPAN 4P84
Diaspora/Diasporas: Cross-cultural Texts and Context
Critical approaches to 'diaspora-space' and 'diaspora-times' in the formation of narrative identity across travel writing (diaries, chronicles, letters) autobiographies, and oral narrative discourse. Diasporic parameters focus on Ibero-Afro/Latin America.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one SPAN credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPAN 4V66.
SPAN 4V60-4V69
Special Research Topics
Course content may vary, depending on research interests of instructor.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two SPAN credits numbered 3(alpha)00 or above.
Administrative Assistant
Violetta Clitheroe
905-688-5550, extension 3312
Mackenzie Chown A240
brocku.ca/modernlanguages
The Hispanic and Latin American Studies program aims to provide students with a thorough and comprehensive knowledge of Iberian (Spanish and Portuguese) and Latin American cultures. Students in the program acquire excellent linguistic competence and a thorough understanding of these literatures, languages and cultures within the dynamics of a trans-border and interdisciplinary approach. The HLAS program offers an array of courses which exposes students to a broader disciplinary background, and gives them opportunities for cross-disciplinary studies. Students enrolled in the HLAS program mainly work toward dual degrees with majors or minors in other languages and linguistics; and/or combined with a variety of fields, as well as a concentration in Romance Linguistics, as well as a concentration in Spanish and Comparative Studies in Romance Literatures and Cultures.The program equips students with the analytical and experiential skills necessary to pursue graduate research as well as meet the demands of a professional career. Our courses integrate lectures with online modules, small group tutorials and opportunities to apply concepts to real-life situations via internships and community outreach. 
The Department also offers a series of courses taught in English (designated MLLC) that may be acceptable for credit toward a degree in Hispanic and Latin American Studies. Students are encouraged to participate in a study program in Latin America, Portugal and/or Spain.
Experiential Learning and Community Outreach Internship
Students have the possibility to engage in courses that promote community engagement and global citizenship. These courses also serve as a medium for linguistic fluency and cultural understanding with career-oriented internship experience. Students have the opportunity of enriching their academic studies and professionalization by being placed with community organizations and agencies. Students have also had the opportunity of participating in international placements.

51

Indigenous Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
INDG 1F01
Introduction to Mohawk
Common sentence forms and vocabulary taught by audio-lingual methods. Listening, reading and writing of words and language recorded by Mohawk speakers. Extended dialogues to increase fluency in speech and reading.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: one-third of class time is devoted to the study of Mohawk culture.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1F01, 1P01 and 1P02.
INDG 1F03
Introduction to Cayuga
Common sentence forms and vocabulary taught by audio-lingual methods. Listening to, reading and writing stories recorded by native speakers are used. Materials are chosen for cultural and linguistic content. Extended dialogues and storytelling to increase fluency in speech and reading. Transcription of and response to recorded language samples to extend writing in the Cayuga language.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INDG (ABST) 1P03 and 1P04.
INDG 1F20
Introduction to Nishnawbe Languages
Common sentence forms and vocabulary taught by audio-lingual methods. Listening, reading and writing of stories recorded by native speakers. Extended dialogues and storytelling to increase fluency in speech and reading.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1F20.
INDG 1F90
Introduction to Indigenous Studies
Indigenous cultures in contemporary North America. Diverse and common features of different nations; effects of geography, politics, history and language use.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1F90.
INDG 1F94
The Traditional Indigenous Family
The traditional Indigenous family from pre-contact to the contemporary. Topics include commonalities among cultures, dynamics of family change and development, traditional family planning and parenting as well as individual, family and community relationships and roles.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1F94.
INDG 1P22
Technology in Indigenous Community
Topics include representation of information, Microsoft applications, internet searching and library database instruction.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ABWC certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1P22.
INDG 2F01
Intermediate Mohawk
Development of communication abilities and acquisition of the punctual, indefinite and perfect verb forms; transitive pronouns, noun incorporation and locative. Extension of literacy and oral skills through taped and written traditional stories.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG (ABST) 1F01 (1P02).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F01.
*INDG 2F14
Decolonizing Indigenous Women's Identities
(also offered as SOCI 2F14 and WGST 2F14)
Indigenous women's identities from social, cultural and political perspectives emphasizing culture, tradition and spirituality.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F14.
INDG 2F20
Intermediate Nishnawbe Languages
Development of communication abilities and acquisition of the punctual, indefinite and perfect verb forms; transitive pronouns, noun incorporation and locatives. Extension of literacy and oral skills through taped and written traditional stories.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG (ABST) 1F20 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F20.
INDG 2F40
Indigenous Creative Arts
Historical and contemporary Indigenous creative expression from various traditions and cultures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F40.
INDG 2F70
Sharing Our Stories as an Approach to History
The traditional Anishnawbeg Story of the Seven Fires forms as organizational framework for the study of community histories of the Nishnawbe Aski territory.
Lectures/seminar, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BEd-Primary/Junior (Aboriginal) majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F70.
INDG 2F80
Introduction to Indigenous Education in Canada
Overview of First Nation, Metis and Inuit education in Canada. Examination of various Indigenous traditions, philosophies and culturally-based models from both historical and contemporary Indigenous perspectives. Indigenous perspectives on the current state and future direction of teaching and research.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F80.
INDG 2F91
Studies in Haudenosaunee History
History of a selected Haudenosaunee society emphasizing the historical perceptions, developments and interpretations of that society.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F91.
#INDG 2F95
Indigenous Culture and Early Childhood Education
(also offered as EDUC 2F95)
Introduction of the culture of a selected Indigenous Society to early childhood educators.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the BECE program.
Students will not receive earned credit in INDG 2F95 if ABST 2F96 has been successfully completed.
INDG 2F96
Studies in Indigenous Culture I
Culture of a selected Indigenous society emphasizing the cultural perceptions, developments and interpretations of that society.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F96.
INDG 2F97
Studies in Haudenosaunee Culture
Culture of a selected Haudenosaunee society emphasizing the cultural perceptions, developments and interpretations of that society.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F97.
INDG 2F98
Studies in Indigenous Culture II
Independent study in an area of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F98.
INDG 2M90-2M95
Studies in Indigenous History
Variable topics course that surveys the history of a selected Indigenous society emphasizing the historical perceptions, developments and interpretations of that society.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2M90-2M95.
INDG 2M96-2M99
Studies in Indigenous Culture
Variable topics course that surveys the culture of a selected Indigenous society emphasizing the cultural perceptions, developments and interpretations of that society.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2M96-2M99.
INDG 2P03
Intermediate Cayuga I
Application of literacy skills and extension of vocabulary and listening skills by reading taped stories and legends and responding orally to audio-taped exercises and in writing to printed exercises.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG (ABST) 1P04.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2P03.
INDG 2P04
Intermediate Cayuga II
Development of communication abilities and acquisition of the grammatical forms of future, aorist, indefinite and perfect tenses; transitive pronouns, noun incorporation and locatives.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG (ABST) 2P03.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2P04.
*INDG 2P17
Reclaiming Indigenous Women's Literary Traditions
(also offered as WGST 2P17)
Indigenous women's literature and the stories embedded within the literature as they apply to Indigenous women's histories. Emphasis on decolonizing, reclaiming and strategies of resistance through writing.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ABWC students until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2P17.
INDG 2P50
Indigenous Spirituality I
Comparative survey of Indigenous spiritual traditions and the influence on contemporary lifestyle and thought of peoples residing in Canada and the United States.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1P50.
INDG 2P51
Indigenous Spirituality II
Study of the similarities and differences in Haudenosaunee and Anishinabe spiritual tradition and belief system.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1P51.
INDG 2P90
Pre-Confederation Indigenous History
Impact of colonialism on Indigenous peoples from contact to Confederation. Social, economic, and cultural impact on various First Nations, Metis and Inuit peoples of Canada.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1P90.
INDG 2P91
Post-Confederation Indigenous History
Impact of colonialism on Indigenous peoples from Confederation to present day. Social, economic, and cultural impact on various First Nation, Metis and Inuit peoples of Canada.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 1P91.
INDG 2P94
Introduction to Grammar for Teaching Indigenous Languages
Rudiments of Indigenous grammar and the way it is taught in a school setting emphasizing pronoun and verb morphologies.
Lectures, seminar, 36 hours.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2P94 and ABTE 8P91.
#INDG 2P96
Indigenous Theatre
(also offered as CANA 2P96 and DART 2P96)
Theatrical, dramatic and performative representation of Indigenous peoples in the Canadian experience.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93) or permission of the Department of Dramatic Arts.
Note: materials fee and field trip fee may be required. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2P96.
INDG 3F01
Advanced Mohawk
Advanced studies in reading, writing and speaking in the Mohawk Language in a cultural context.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG (ABST) 2F01.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3F01.
INDG 3F03
Advanced Cayuga
Focus on the Great Law and the Code of Handsome Lake. Study of the elevated language and contemporary significance of these works from a Cayuga perspective.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG (ABST) 2P04.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3F03.
INDG 3F90
Studies in Indigenous History I
History of a selected Indigenous society emphasizing the historical perceptions, developments and interpretations of that society.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F90.
INDG 3F91
Studies in Indigenous History II
Independent study in an area of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F92.
#INDG 3P25
Land, Body, and Sovereignty  Indigenous Perspectives
(also offered as WGST 3P25)
Indigenous understanding of the interconnections between land, Indigenous sovereignty, and the ability to exercise sovereignty over ones body. Taught in accordance with Indigenous ways of knowing and doing, this course involves land-based learning that require students to be outside and/or visiting community sites.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, one INDG (ABST) credit or permission of the instructor.
*INDG 3P47
Indigenous Women's Literature: Activism and Empowerment
(also offered as WGST 3P47)
Stories embedded within the literature as they apply to contemporary settings. Exploration of the power of Indigenous women's writing as a political and educational tool.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3P47.
#INDG 3P69
Critical Perspectives in Indigenous Criminalization
(also offered as CRIM 3P69 and SOCI 3P69)
Sociological approaches to Indigenous criminalization. Topics may include imprisonment, gendered violence, state crimes, the policing of protest, and Indigenous law and self-governance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one INDG (ABST) credit or SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3P69.
*INDG 3P81
Indigenous Mothering and Motherhood: Historical and Contemporary Realities
(also offered as SOCI 3P81 and WGST 3P81)
Indigenous ideologies of mothering and motherhood from a variety of perspectives. Historical mothering practices and family structures highlighting unique roles of Indigenous women in many communities. Contemporary understandings of Indigenous ideologies of motherhood.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3P80.
INDG 3P84
Indigenous Human Rights
Historical and contemporary topics may include the Indian Act, Residential Schools, Child Welfare, Treaty relationships, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and violence against Indigenous women. Development and application of and implications for future directions.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
INDG 3P85
Indigenous Perspectives in the Media
Historic and contemporary portrayals of women, land, spirituality, politics, education and Indigenous people in the media from an Indigenous perspective.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
#INDG 3P86
Indigenous Peoples in Global Perspective
(also offered as CRIM 3P86, SOCI 3P86 and WGST 3P86)
Contemporary debates in global Indigenous movements, including the legacy of colonization, land dispossession, cultural appropriation and new developments in the areas of environmental justice, cultural revival and political sovereignty.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of, one INDG (ABST) credit, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INDG (SOCI) 3P46 and ABST 3P86.
INDG 3P95
Materials Development for Language Teaching
Teaching materials suitable to career settings and consistent with language methods taught in the program.
Lectures, seminar, 36 hours.
Restriction: open to students admitted to the Primary and Junior (Aboriginal) program.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3P95 and ABTE 8P94.
#INDG 3Q90
Indigenous Cultural Production and Activism
(also offered as COMM 3Q90, DART 3Q90, INDG 3Q90, PCUL 3Q90, SOCI 3Q90 and WGST 3Q90)
Draws on cultural, experiential and theoretical texts to better understand Indigenous epistemologies. Examples include ImagineNative and community arts projects.
Lectures, field work, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of, one INDG (ABST) credit, COMM 1F90, PCUL 1F92, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#INDG 3Q97
Indigenous Feminisms
(also offered as SOCI 3Q97 and WGST 3Q97)
Re-conceptualizes feminisms within a transnational Indigenous framework. Topics include debates within Indigenous knowledge production, analyses of genders and sexualities, violence, poverty, the politics of reproduction, cultural identities, media, and environmental and social justice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of, one INDG (ABST) credit, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INDG (SOCI/WGST) 2P97.
#INDG 3Q98
Indigenous Peoples in North America
(also offered as SOCI 3Q98 and WGST 3Q98)
Contemporary struggles for cultural survival, land, self-determination and rights in the context of colonialism in North America. Diversity of Indigenous peoples, including their internal debates and divides.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of, one INDG (ABST) credit, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3Q98, INDG (SOCI) 3P46 and INDG (SOCI/WGST) 3P76.
INDG 4F01
The Haudenosaunee Spirit
Three main cultural traditions of contemporary and traditional Haudenosaunee: the Teharonhyawkoh - The Myth of the Earth Grasper (an extensive treatise on Iroquoian Cosmology), the Kaya-nere'kowa -Constitution of the Great Law and the Kariwiyo - the Code of Handsome Lake.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG (ABST) 3F01 or 3F03.
Note: this course will be conducted partially in the Mohawk language and utilize guest speakers who are recognized experts on the Iroquoian tradition.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 4F01.
#INDG 4P76
Indigenous Social and Political Thought
(also offered as CRIM 4P76, SOCI 4P76 and WGST 4P76)
History and contemporary literatures on Indigenous epistemologies, the political philosophy of movements for decolonization, environmental sustainability, and Indigenous writing on gendered justice and cultural resurgence in a globalizing world emphasizing writings by Indigenous scholars.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SOCI (single or combined), CRIM and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of, one INDG (ABST) credit, two SOCI credits, two WGST credits or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 4P76.
INDG 4P84
Indigenous Peoples and Social Justice: Contemporary Issues
Critical analysis of social justice issues that impact Indigenous communities with respect to land, politics, children, governance and women.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
INDG 4P91
Contemporary Indigenous Performance I
Advanced exploration of North American Indigenous cultures and representations through multimedia and interdisciplinary performance.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
INDG 4P92
Contemporary Indigenous Performance II
Creation and production of original works dealing with North American Indigenous topics and issues.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): INDG 4P91.
Administrative Co-ordinator
Sarah McGean
905-688-5550, extension 3530
Welch Hall 68
The Tecumseh Centre for Aboriginal Research and Education focuses on Turtle Island Indigenous Cultures and Issues and offers an opportunity to study Indigenous languages, culture and society from a variety of disciplinary perspectives. It includes courses in Indigenous Studies and cross-listed courses from co-operating faculty in other departments/centres: Dramatic Arts, Sociology, and Women's and Gender Studies.
The Centre offers a program leading to a Certificate in Indigenous Language. The program provides an in-depth study of an Indigenous language and culture from beginner to advanced level.
The Centre also offers the Gidayaamin Indigenous Certificate Program, designed to be a first year certificate that allows students to transition into an undergraduate degree program of their choice. Embedded in the program design is a holistic system of support that will assist Indigenous women in meeting their full academic potential in balance with cultural traditions and spirituality.
The requirements for admission to the certificate programs are the same as admission to a degree program. See "Certificate Requirements" under Academic Regulations.
Indigenous Studies courses may be taken for credit as electives in any degree program or as a minor within their degree program.

52

Integrated Studies

53

Interactive Arts and Science
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
INTERACTIVE ARTS AND SCIENCE COURSES
IASC 1F01
Foundations of Interactive Arts and Science
Conceptual frameworks for interactive media technology, design, theory and production. Focus on digital scholarship, expression, prototyping, and instructional design. Practice-based projects leading to the development of an interactive media product.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined), IASC/BEd (junior Intermediate) majors or permission of the Centre.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC 1F00.
IASC 1F02
Being Human in a Digital World
Exploration of how emerging technologies shape human identities and lifestyles. Impact of rapid technological change on citizenship, education, employment, entertainment, globalization, health, privacy and security. Predictions of what the future may hold and its implications for the human condition.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors, IASC/BEd (junior Intermediate) until date specified in Registration guide. In Spring session open to all students.
Note: may be offered as a blended or online format.
#IASC 1P00
Introduction to Media Computation
(also offered as APCO 1P00)
Programming by example; designing and debugging of programs; encoding and manipulation of text and graphics; file processing; simple HTML and automatic generation, manipulating and parsing of web pages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: not open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors.
Note: prior computer experience is not required.
#IASC 1P01
Fluency With Technology
(also offered as APCO 1P01)
Skills, concepts and capabilities of computers, networks and the Internet. Topics include representation of information, current hardware, software and network technologies, modelling with Excel, presentations with Powerpoint, Internet searching and basic web page development with HTML.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors.
Note: some prior computer experience is preferred but not required.
*IASC 1P02
Web Media Production
(also offered as STAC 1P02)
Principles of interactive website creation and design. Formatting, lists, images, links and tables with HTML. Web colour and graphics formats. Typography and layout with CSS. Buttons, rollovers and forms with JavaScript. Usability, accessibility and interactivity. Creation of public interactive web-based projects using modern development techniques.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
IASC 1P03
Makerspace Foundations
Introduction to the Brock Makerspace and the maker culture. Methods of inquiry and creative activity incorporating hands on learning with emerging technologies.
Lab, tutorial, 4 hours per week
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
IASC 1P04
New Media and Games
Information, knowledge, and expression in interactive and networked media environments. Technologies and socio-political infrastructures that make such media possible. Historical development of and precedents for interactive media. Concepts in poetics, hypertextuality, hypermediacy, remediation, social relations and play. Projects that build active participation in new media cultures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors or permission of the Centre.
IASC 1P05
Games, Genres and Aesthetics
Exploration of the diverse ways in which meaning is created in games. History of games and key concepts in game studies addressing formalisms, platforms, communities and player experience. Consideration of the games industry and studio development.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors.
Note: materials fee required.
*IASC 1P06
History and Future of Storytelling
(also offered as ENCW 1P06 and WRDS 1P06)
History of storytelling from the earliest oral traditions to contemporary forms of digital expression. Storytelling's cultural roots in fairytales, legends and myths through to film, video games and interactive fiction. Elements of narrative, structure, character, conflict, and dramatic arc. Concepts and practices in rhetoric, storyboarding, and presentation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 1P06.
IASC 1P10
Introduction to Media Tools
Systematic examination of imaging, multimedia authoring and animation software tools and their application to problems in visualization, representation and sequencing of image, text, video and audio content. Portfolio development emphasizes conceptualization and reflection in new media contexts.
Lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: enrolment limited to 24 students.
*IASC 1P30
Programming for Interactive Media
(also offered as APCO 1P30)
Introduction to contemporary programming syntax including classes, functions, properties and events for developing interactive media applications.
Lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: enrolment limited to 20 students.
#IASC 1P50
Integrity and Literacy in the Information Age
(also offered as APCO 1P50 and COSC 1P50)
Issues in use of information technology including historic and social perspectives; legal, ethical and moral issues; intellectual property, licensing and copyright; privacy and freedom of expression; professional conduct and information literacy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; seminar, 1.5 hours per week.
Note: this course involves seminars and considerable written work. A good command of written and spoken English is required.
#IASC 1P93
Applied Programming
(also offered as APCO 1P93)
Modern software techniques including problem solving and design of effective algorithms, structured program design methodology, subprogram library usage, documentation, correctness, floating-point arithmetic and error analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: not open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST and CNET majors.
Prerequisite(s): APCO 1P00 or 4U mathematics credit.
#IASC 1P95
Digital Foundation
(also offered as STAC 1P95 and VISA 1P95)
Technical foundations of digital images, media methods and concepts including web-based, digital photography, image processing software and printing; foundations of digital media in video, audio and computational production and post-production. Contemporary digital practices within the broader history of visual and media arts.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to IASC (single or combined), COSC (single or combined), MCMN, STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours) BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: students will need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#IASC 1P96
Studio Foundation
(also offered as VISA 1P96)
Basic aesthetic and conceptual processes that underlie visual art production. Two- and three-dimensional formal principles, fundamental critical issues and stylistic/material development. Examples from historic and contemporary art practice provide context for studio projects and readings.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to IASC (single or combined) and VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Production and Design Concentration students may register. Contact the Visual Arts Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#IASC 1P99
The Culture of Noise
(also offered as MUSI 1P99, STAC 1P99 and VISA 1P99)
Role of noise in music, social space and art. Exploration of discursive issues concerning the value of sound studies.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours, online
#IASC 1Q98
Introduction to Visual Culture
(also offered as VISA 1Q98)
Overview of visual culture, its vocabulary, technologies and structures within varied cultural contexts. Problems of meaning, functions of visual culture in contemporary society, the role of galleries and museums, and the impact of imagery in advertising, popular media and consumer culture. Contemporary critical methodology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours week.
Note: no studio work. May be offered online or blended. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 1Q98.
#IASC 1Q99
Contemporary Issues in The History of Western Art
(also offered as VISA 1Q99)
Analysis of key issues in the history of Western art, including various ways of looking at the visual past and present. Focus on the visual arts from prehistory through the early 20th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours week.
Note: no studio work. May be offered online or blended. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 1Q99.
#IASC 2F27
Historical Geographic Information Systems
(also offered as HIST 2F27)
Overview of multiple fields in history in which Geographic Information Systems are applied. Instruction in use of software and provides local history project for students to apply software skills
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Note: labs focus on the history of St. Catharines.
IASC 2P01
Foundations of Project Management
Professional strategies for planning and managing projects from inception to closure. Managing risks and constraints. Promoting collaboration and communication. Time management strategies for individuals and project teams. Solutions to common project management challenges. Introduction to project management software and organizers.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined), IASC/BEd (junior Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits. In Spring session open to all students with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
IASC 2P02
Solving Problems through Interactive Arts and Science
Role of digital tools in addressing scholarly questions in the humanities. Case studies, current trends and critical debates.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors or permission of the Centre.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the Centre.
IASC 2P03
Interaction and Interface Design
Composition and interface design for reactive and interactive systems. Layout, graphics and media tools for user interface design. Models for how interactivity shapes understanding and expectations of digital media tools and interfaces.
Seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined), IASC/BEd (junior Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the Centre.
IASC 2P04
Ludology
Nature, psychology and characteristics of play. Theories related to fun, play and games including improvisation, competition, exploration, role-playing, sports and thrill-seeking. Examination of formal and informal games, goals, rules, decisions, interaction, rewards and penalties, and psychological triggers and responses. Analysis of gameplay, player experience, engagement, mechanics, design and usability.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1P04 and 1P05 or permission of the Centre.
IASC 2P05
Game Design Paradigms
Conceptual and practical frameworks for the design of games as systems. Consideration of the formal structures of games. Focus on world building and narrative, goals and experience, balance, consistency, and meaningful decision making. Simple game prototyping, testing and documentation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1P04 and 1P05 or permission of the Centre.
IASC 2P06
3D Objects, Environments and Visualization
Introduction to concepts and tools for 3D modelling, texturing, lighting, cameras, and navigation for the production of virtual spaces and mixed-reality environments. Contemporary perspectives on the simulation and representation of 3D spaces in a humanities context. Introduction to 3D scanning and printing.
Seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the Centre.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC (VISA) 2P96.
#IASC 2P07
Introduction to Geospatial Technologies
(also offered as ERSC 2P07, GEOG 2P07 and TOUR 2P07)
Concepts and applications of geographic information systems (GIS), global positioning systems (GPS) and remote sensing. Properties of digital maps, airborne data and satellite imagery. Principles of map compilation and design. Practical experience in computer mapping, image interpretation and GIS analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
IASC 2P08
Competencies in Interactive Arts and Science
Workshops, conferences, networking events, volunteer opportunities and other experiences related to the Interactive Arts and Science program.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined), IASC/BEd (junior Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1F01 (1F00).
Note: for further information consult the brocku.ca/iasc website.
#IASC 2P11
Personal Computers and Networks
(also offered as APCO 2P11)
Inner workings of modern computers from a user's point of view. Understanding the hardware, network and system software. Topics include CPUs, memory, video, input/output, networks, security, installation of operating systems and hands-on trouble shooting.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to APCO minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET majors and APCO minors.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1P01 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in APCO 2P01.
#IASC 2P15
Speculative Fiction
(also offered as ENGL 2P15)
Critical study of some of the histories, contexts, genres, and traditions of science fiction and the literature of the fantastic.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one Humanities context credit (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
#IASC 2P25
Revolutions in Communication
(also offered as HIST 2P25)
Major developments in the history of communication from the invention of writing until the modern information age.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#IASC 2P28
Persuasive Discourse: Theoretical Foundations
(also offered as ENGL 2P28 and WRDS 2P28)
Classical foundations, historical developments and contemporary theory. Relation of language use to cultural practices, ethics, identity and power. Analysis of various genres of texts and persuasive writing in popular culture and mass media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (singe or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from IASC 1F01 (1F00), COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P28.
#IASC 2P50
Great Myths in Literature and Art
(also offered as CLAS 2P50)
Most influential myths in Greek and Latin literature and in ancient art, emphasizing continuity of themes and images. Selected readings in major genres of poetry and prose. Selected works of painting and sculpture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#IASC 2P70
Introduction to Literary Theory
(also offered as ENGL 2P70)
Approaches to meaning and interpretation in the contemporary study of literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1F01 (1F00), one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#IASC 2P89
Internet Technologies
(also offered as APCO 2P89 and COSC 2P89)
Concepts and techniques for building and maintaining advanced interactive Web sites. Topics include XML and SGML, database connectivity and forms handling, basic animation, graphics optimization for the Web, scripting, advanced searching and Web design for accessibility.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/seminar, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1P00 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P01 (minimum 60 percent), or COSC 1P03 (minimum 60 percent).
#IASC 2P90
Networks, Digital Identities and Interactions
(also offered as COMM 2P90)
Introduction to the foundations of the internet, online communities and social networking. Critical engagement with identity and interactive communication practices in our digitally mediated lives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC 1F01 (1F00), IASC 1P04 and 1P05, COMM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
#IASC 2P91
Social Media
(also offered as COMM 2P91 and PCUL 2P91)
Theory, philosophy and politics of Social Media as a communicative mode. Politics of participatory and commodified culture online and the processes of planning content to convey a narrative or convene a community.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC 1F01 (1F00), COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, PCUL 1F92 or permission of the instructor.
#IASC 2P93
Critical Practice in the Fine and Performing Arts
(also offered as CANA 2P93, MLLC 2P93 and STAC 2P93)
Interdisciplinary approach to key ideas about music, art, dance and drama through critical readings and guided exposure to selected public fine and performing art events. Exploration of issues in aesthetics and criticism using varied theoretical approaches.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC 1F01 (1F00), CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
Note: event attendance is required; events fees required. May be offered online or blended.
#IASC 2P94
Embodied Text: Art Beyond the Artifact
(also offered as CANA 2P94, MLLC 2P94 and STAC 2P94)
Functions of art and artifacts outside the conventions associated with words, texts, paintings and scores. Experiencing musical, visual, movement and theatre vocabularies through the exploration of spatial/temporal/aesthetic/embodied forms of art in performance.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC 1F01 (1F00), CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
#IASC 2P97
Digital Video in Contemporary Art
(also offered as STAC 2P97 and VISA 2P97)
Concepts of basic videography and its applications within conceptual and aesthetic studio practice. Camera work, composition and lighting; digital video and audio editing, special effects, composing, text and titling, and HD output. Critical analysis of recent and contemporary film and video practices.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined), STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to open to IASC (single or combined), STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from IASC 1F01 (1F00), VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Students with credit in FILM 2F98 may register. Contact Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
*IASC 2P98
Intermedia
(also offered as STAC 2P98)
Approaches to the conceptualization and production of video, sound generation, multimedia environments, performance, interactive and installation art.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the Centre.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in VISA 2P98.
#IASC 2P99
Introduction to Sound Design in Contemporary Art
(also offered as STAC 2P99 and VISA 2P99)
Approaches to the conceptualization and production of sound recording, notation, field-recording, Foley arts, soundtrack production, experimental music and performance, and contemporary sound art.
Lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to IASC (single or combined), GAMD, STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from IASC 1F01 (1F00), VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials may be fee required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Students with credit in FILM 2F98 may register. Contact Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#IASC 2Q90
Digital Archives: Construction, Scholarship and Functionality
(also offered as ITAL 2Q90 and STAC 2Q90)
Digital archives, their functionality, development and role in Humanities research. Sites studied will range from library collections to single authors and artist projects, including museum and audio archives. Engagement in the creation of a digital archive.
Lectures, lab 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: delivered in English. No knowledge of Italian required.
#IASC 2Q95
Introduction to Interactive Media
(also offered as STAC 2Q95 and VISA 2Q95)
Concepts and creation in electronic media enabled by physical interaction between a user/viewer and a sculpture. Installation, sound and video environment or wearable media. Fundamental concepts of voltage, current and resistance. Use of simple circuits, sensors and switches, software interfaces and basic microprocessors.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to IASC (single or combined), STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one of two IASC credits, four COSC credits, one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), or permission of the instructor.
Note: no previous experience in electronics required. Students might need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
IASC 3F01
Digital Document Production
Concepts and skills related to graphic design, typography and desktop publishing. Production of academic posters, booklets, charts and graphs, newsletters, portfolios, presentations, promotional materials, technical documentation, and other print-based digital documents.
Seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre.
IASC 3F02
Interactive Media Practices, Prototyping and Production
Concepts, design, and best practices in the development of an interactive media object. Professional project management strategies for production in a team environment.
Seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined), IASC/BEd (junior Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit in IASC 3F00.
IASC 3F91
Innovations in Advanced Digital Media
Introduction to advanced interactive media concepts and visualization technologies. Design and workflow issues and integration of visual effects and 3D animations with live action media. May include motion capture, 3D and 2D animation, HD, 2K and 4K live action video and 3D graphics software.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in STAC 3F91 and VISA 3F91.
IASC 3F92
Best Practices in Instructional Design
Real-world practice-based projects drawing on the principles of instructional design. Integration of text, multimedia, interactive, and online elements to accomplish project goals.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC and IASC/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Note: enrolment is limited. Collaborations between students with digital tool, pedagogical, and subject content expertise.
*IASC 3F93
Project Collaborations Across Diverse Programs
(also offered as HIST 3F93)
Interactive media projects carried out by multi-disciplinary teams of students.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Note: enrolment is limited.
IASC 3F95
Advanced Internship in Interactive Media
Placement in a business related to interactive media or the gaming industry.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, and permission of the Centre.
Corequisite(s): IASC 3Q92
Note: application required. Enrolment will be limited to the number of placements available
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC 3P95.
IASC 3F96
Advanced Internship in Game Design
Placement in a business related to the games industry.
Restriction: open to GAMD students with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Note: application required. Enrolment will be limited to the number of placements available.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC 3P95.
#IASC 3P01
Media Transformations in the Creative Arts
(also offered as MLLC 3P01, STAC 3P01 and VISA 3P01)
The trajectory and influences of new media on the development of and discourses in 20th century and contemporary creative production including the arts, broadcast, film, video, and electronic arenas such as the internet, games and interactive media. Overview of fundamental concepts, practices and language. Consideration of aesthetics, production, script and story, direction, authorship, collaborative process and distribution.
Lectures, 3 hours per week online.
Prerequisite(s): two IASC, COMM, ENGL, STAC, VISA, WRDS (WRIT) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or blended.
IASC 3P02
Publishing for New Literacies
Dissemination of academic scholarship and interactive digital projects through non-traditional new media platforms. Collaborative scholarship through online communities of inquiry. Scholarly legitimacy and peer review in the digital age.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
IASC 3P03
Prototyping with Micro Controllers and Mobile Technologies
Applied programming and prototyping with small computing devices and peripherals.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors and permission of the Centre.
IASC 3P04
Immersion and Simulation
Cognitive, perceptual and imaginative processes that produce a sense of total engrossment in a digital environment. Modelling and simulation of the appearance and behaviours of a world.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 2P04 and 2P05 or permission of the Centre.
#IASC 3P05
Geographic Information Systems
(also offered as ERSC 3P05 and GEOG 3P05)
Principles and use of computer-based systems for capturing, managing, manipulating, analysing and displaying data relating to the Earth's surface, emphasizing raster applications. Practical work using ArcGIS.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
IASC 3P06
Game Criticism
Critical methods from literary, film and cultural contexts, informed by the emerging canon of game criticism, and applied to games as expressive and cultural artifacts. Discourse analysis focusing on game genres, perspective, hardware platforms, computational frameworks, gameplay affordances, narratives, ludology and the process of meaning making.
Lecture, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 2P04 and 2P05 or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
#IASC 3P10
Advanced Video Art
(also offered as VISA 3P10)
Creative, technical, and critical skills for video art production, post-production and critical evaluation. Introduction to a variety of forms and approaches to video art, emphasizing creating video art and its contextualization in contemporary art discourses.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until the date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): two IASC, VISA credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: completion of VISA 1P95 recommended. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Students may need field trip expenses which they must supply. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
IASC 3P11
Motion Capture Studio
Intermediate concepts and tools for 3D modeling and animation including motion capture technologies. History and contemporary use of motion capture technologies in interactive digital media.
Lecture, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, GAMD majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre.
#IASC 3P14
Dramatic Creation for Contemporary Cultural Practice
(also offered as DART 3P14, MLLC 3P14, STAC 3P14 and VISA 3P14)
Components of dramatic story. Understanding character, dramatic action, structure, direction, improvisation, tempo, rhythm, voice and body potential. Theory and practical application in projects for creators in the arts, media and film.
Seminar, workshop, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two IASC, COMM, DART, STAC, VISA credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment limited to 20 students. Materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. May be offered online or blended.
Students will not receive earned credit for IASC 3P14 if DART 3F50, 3P53 or 3P92 have been successfully completed.
#IASC 3P15
Writing for New Media
(also offered as WRDS 3P15)
Theory and practice of writing for new online media. May include web sites, blogs, Twitter and other social media.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P15.
#IASC 3P26
Social and Cultural Aspects of Digital Gaming
(also offered as COMM 3P26 and PCUL 3P26)
Critical investigation of digital gaming, particularly of the interrelationships among past and present games, culture and media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1P04 and 1P05, or PCUL 2P20.
#IASC 3P28
Rhetorical Analysis
(also offered as ENGL 3P28 and WRDS 3P28)
Analysis of literary and non-literary texts using categories, insights and practices of classical and contemporary rhetorical studies. Texts include poetry, fiction, drama, journalism, scientific and political writing, and advertising. Attention to the rhetoric of public spaces, issues of social justice, and the building and maintenance of human communities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), and WRDS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits, one WRDS (WRIT) credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P28.
#IASC 3P36
Digital Innovations: History and Computing I
(also offered as CLAS 3P36 and HIST 3P36)
Explores innovative, digital methods historians are using to research, express and teach the past.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: practical component features introduction to 3D modelling.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC (CLAS/HIST) 3F31.
#IASC 3P37
Digital Innovations: History and Computing II
(also offered as CLAS 3P37 and HIST 3P37)
Surveys ways historians have used computation to transform our understanding of the past.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: practical component features introduction to more advanced methods for 3D modelling.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC (CLAS/HIST) 3F31.
#IASC 3P39
Contemporary Literature in English
(also offered as ENGL 3P39)
The postmodern period emphasizing the forms, approaches and cultural responses that have characterized writing in English in the later 20th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC (2P57) and 2P70, two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#IASC 3P73
Creative Writing for Digital Media
(also offered as ENCW 3P73, ENGL 3P73 and WRDS 3P73)
Exploration of new avenues for creative expression opened by digital technologies. Consideration of how digitalization changes such notions as the nature of creativity, genre, audience, authorship and copyright.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined), ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), GAMD majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): two ENGL credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P73.
#IASC 3P90
Advanced Topics in Digital Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P90)
Contemporary and digital culture issues emerging from industry practices, scholarly research, and user activities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC 2P90, 2P91, COMM 2P26 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will work collaboratively on a wiki-based archive of extended book reviews.
#IASC 3P92
Technology and Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P92 and PCUL 3P92)
Critical analysis of the ways in which culture and technology are mutually productive of one another using historical, contemporary and emerging examples drawn from everyday life.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC 2P90, 2P91, COMM 2P26 or permission of the instructor.
#IASC 3P93
Heritage Interpretation in the Digital Age
(also offered as TOUR 3P93)
Use of web-based and mobile digital platforms to identify, inventory, interpret, and conserve Niagara's natural and cultural heritage. Role of environmental heritage in tourism and education.
Lectures, tutorial, project workshop, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two IASC credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99, two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor
Note: tutorials and class meetings held throughout the term. Independent fieldwork for production of an online thematic interpretive resource focusing on heritage features in Niagara.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 4P19.
#IASC 3P94
Introduction to Human Computer Interaction
(also offered as APCO 3P94 and COSC 3P94)
Human factors in the design and support of computing systems. Design methodologies such as GOMS, TAGs and Task Analysis. Design principles relating to various interaction paradigms.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/seminar, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two credits from IASC (minimum 60 percent), APCO (minimum 60 percent), COSC (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
IASC 3P96
Level Design for Games and Immersive Media
Critical analyses and practical studies in the design of world spaces for video games and other interactive media.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to IASC (single or combined), GAMD and GAMP majors. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered as a blended or online format.
IASC 3P97
Interactive Media Portfolio
Cumulative portfolio that presents and reflects upon individual and team work (process and completed productions) developed through Interactive Arts and Science program.
Lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, GAMD majors with a minimum of 15 credits and IASC/BEd (junior Intermediate) until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: materials fee required. Students must supply any additional materials and equipment.
IASC 3P98
Directed Studies
Program of study through research and readings designed in consultation with the faculty member directing the course.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre, GAMD majors with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their directed study course with a faculty member and must submit a written contract signed by the faculty member to the Director prior to registration.
IASC 3P99
Directed Project
Interactive media project with directed readings designed in consultation with the faculty member directing the course.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, GAMD majors with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their directed project course with a faculty member and must submit a written contract signed by the faculty member to the Director prior to registration.
IASC 3Q90
Competencies in Game Design
University to industry career transition preparation. Workshops, networking events and other professional development experiences related to game studies and design.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
IASC 3Q92
Advanced Internship in Interactive Media Project
Analysis of individual internship experience (IASC 3F95) in a business related to interactive media or the gaming industry
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, and permission of the Centre.
Corequisite(s): IASC 3F95
Note: application required. Enrolment will be limited to the number of placements available.
#IASC 3Q98
The Psychology of Screens (Television and Beyond)
(also offered as COMM 3Q98, PCUL 3Q98 and PSYC 3Q98)
Cognitive responses to mediated communication including television and new/emerging information and communication technologies. Focus on cognitive effects, theories and research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of IASC 1F01, IASC 1P04 and 1P05, COMM 1F90, PSYC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in COMM (PCUL/PSYC) 3P95 and COMM 3Q20.
#IASC 3Q99
Advanced Sound Design
(also offered as STAC 3Q99 and VISA 3Q99)
Further develop skills and acquire knowledge on the field of digital sound, focusing on recording theory, post-production techniques and presentation. Installation practices in Sound Art and use of hardware and software to create sound-based art projects.
Lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to IASC (single or combined), STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 2P99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
IASC 4F01
Honours Thesis
Thesis on a topic of mutual interest to the student and the instructor. Textual document which may or may not include a digital component.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum of 75 percent major average, and permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 3F02; Antirequisite(s): IASC 4L00
IASC 4F03
Team-based Practicum in Game Design and Production
Planning and production of a collaborative game project.
Seminar, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 3P04 and 3P06.
Note: materials fee required. Students must supply any additional materials.
IASC 4L00
Collaborative Practicum in Interactive Media Design and Production
Planning and production of a collaborative interactive media project.
Seminar, lab, 10 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the Centre.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 3F02.
Note: materials fee required. Students must supply any additional materials.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC 4F00.
#IASC 4P01
Creating Social Value from Material Culture
(also offered as MLLC 4P01, STAC 4P01 and VISA 4P01)
Theory and practice of creating social value from material culture. Curatorial and interpretive practice in public institutions focusing on art, human and natural history, and science and technology. Informal learning theory, authority structures and community engagement, audience segmentation and selection, exhibit design, and collections development within social and political contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance may be required. Event fees may be required.
IASC 4P02
Video Game Research and Development
Directed program of readings and research related to the theoretical and practical aspects of game design/development as applied to each student's individual contributions to a team-based project. Best practices in the preparation of design and technical documentation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD and GAMP majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 3P04 and 3P06.
#IASC 4P62
Video Games in the Classroom
(also offered as EDUC 4P62)
Research and current issues related to the integration of video games and other interactive new media technologies into the elementary and secondary school instructional program.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BA Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BA Interactive Arts and Science (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Honours)/BEd(Intermediate/Senior) and BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors and BECE students, until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC (EDUC) 3P62.
#IASC 4P72
High and Low Art: Intersections, Exchanges and Flows
(also offered as MLLC 4P72, STAC 4P72 and VISA 4P72)
The exchange between high art and entertainment, considering intertextuality and cultural appropriation; the changing role of museums and community-based arts; and the migration of values and tastes between market-driven and not-for-profit cultural outcomes.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance is required; event fees required. May be offered online or blended.
IASC 4V70-4V79
Advanced Studies in Interactive Arts and Science
Variable topics in an area of mutual interest to students and instructor.
INTERNSHIP COURSE
IASC 3P95
Internship in Interactive Media
Internship in a business related to interactive media or the gaming industry.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, GAMD majors with a minimum of 15.0 overall credits and permission of the Centre.
Note: application required. Enrolment will be limited to the number of placements available. Students will be required to attend orientation meetings, occasional meetings with internship co-ordinator and develop professional learning objectives. Additional components typically include a site visit, a work term report and an employer performance evaluation. Students who have completed IASC 3F95 or IASC 3F96 may not register for this course.
Administrative Assistant
Clara Suba
905-688-5550 extension 3270
Thistle 269D
brocku.ca/iasc
The Interactive Arts and Science (IASC) program focuses on the intersection of digital technologies and the humanities. The program prepares the next generation of digital media innovators and scholars.
The IASC program is offered through the Centre for Digital Humanities (CDH), which is centrally located on Brock's main campus. The CDH features a wide range of media production facilities that IASC students can utilize in order to achieve their scholarly and creative goals.
The IASC program features academic and hands-on experiences that blend theory and practice. Students explore digital and interactive tools for analyzing, representing and visualizing ideas across disciplinary subjects.
IASC students can choose from a wide selection of courses that focus on interactive media, its theoretical foundations and underlying production methods. Several courses are cross-listed with other academic programs at Brock. There are also directed project courses and an internship option that allow students to gain credit for learning experiences outside the formal classroom.
The IASC program is highly individualized. IASC students can pursue an Honours or Pass Major, a Combined Major or a Minor program of study. Students can also focus their IASC studies on one of four concentration areas.
Most courses are taught in small groups. The IASC program is designed to maximize choice and flexibility so that students can personalize their programs of study. There are also opportunities to collaborate with others, including faculty members and industry experts, on scholarly and interactive media projects.

54

International Political Economy

55

International Study and Exchange Programs

56

Italian Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ITALIAN COURSES
ITAL 1F00
Introductory Italian
Beginner's course for students with no formal knowledge of Standard Italian. Acquisition of reading and oral skills, basic grammar, conversation and composition.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: students who have taken a previous Italian course in high school will not be permitted to take this course. Students must submit an official high school transcript to the instructor in order to demonstrate that they meet course requirements before the end of the second week of classes. Failure to do so will result in de-registration from the course. Experiential Learning component is available for those students interested.
ITAL 1F90
Intermediate Italian
Review of basic grammar; composition and oral practice. Discussions based on cultural topics, cities and the art of Italy.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ITAL 1F00, (1F01), one or more high school Italian credits or permission of instructor.
Note: experiential Learning component is available for those students interested.
ITAL 1P91
Italian for International Exchange Students
Acquisition of reading and oral skills, grammar, conversation and composition. Cultural topics, cities and the art of Italy.
Restriction: permission of instructor.
Note: open to international exchange students and non-native speakers of Italian.
ITAL 1P96
Italian Culture and Civilization
Artistic heritage of Italy and the intellectual, political and social forces that have shaped the mentality and way of life of the Italians. Selected texts and multi-media material.
Lectures, 3 hours per week. Blended.
Restriction: not open to ITAL (single or combined) majors and minors.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained ITAL 1P95 and INTC 1P96.
ITAL 2F00
Language, Literature and Culture
Grammar review; oral and written practice. Introduction to the study of film, literary texts and principles of criticism.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ITAL 1F90 or permission of instructor.
*ITAL 2P80
Italian Cinema
(also offered as STAC 2P80)
Major film directors and cultural trends in Italian cinema. Influence of Italian film on North American directors. Films studied include those by such directors as De Sica, Rossellini, Fellini, Antonioni, Bertolucci, Wertmller, Tornatore, Amelio, Moretti and Sorrentino.
Lectures, 3 hours per week, plus film lab.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian required.
ITAL 2P90
Translation and Language Practice
Translation of selected material from magazine articles, essays and various texts focusing on interference between English and Italian. Introduction to business correspondence.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ITAL 1F90 or permission of instructor.
*ITAL 2P92
Early to High Renaissance Art and Architecture
(also offered as MARS 2P92 and VISA 2P92)
Major monuments, buildings and art works of the period from several critical perspectives including the humanist influence on the arts in Florence and Rome, the issue of patronage and the question of the artist's cultural status.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of ITAL 1F90, MARS 1F90, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English.
ITAL 2P94
Linguistic and Cultural Regionalism in Italy
Cultural, socio-political and economic issues and conditions that characterize the regions of Italy. Emphasis on regional linguistic variants and dialects, and the establishment of a linguistic standard.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: given in English. ITAL 1F90 recommended.
ITAL 2P95
Modern Culture and Civilization
Historical changes and key issues in 19th- and 20th-century Italy focusing on Italian unification, Fascism and modern Italy. Arts and literature representative of the period.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: given in English.
ITAL 2P96
Italian Culture and Society
Overview of the intellectual, political and social forces that have shaped modern-day Italy. Focus on historical periods and how these are reflected in art, literature, architecture and society. Selected texts and multi-media material.
Lectures, 3 hours per week. Blended.
Restriction: open to ITAL (single or combined) majors and minors.
Note: given in English.
#ITAL 2P97
History of the Early Roman Empire
(also offered as CLAS 2P97 and HIST 2P97)
History of Rome from the Battle of Actium to the death of Marcus Aurelius (AD 180) emphasizing social and political developments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 2Q96 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST/ITAL) 3P06.
*ITAL 2P98
Italians in Canada and Italy-Canada Relations
(also offered as CANA 2P98)
History of Italian immigration in Canada focusing on Ontario. Italian-Canadian literature including such writers as Nino Ricci and Mary Di Michele. Cultural and economic relations between Italy and Canada including World War II internment experience. Italian contribution to the arts in Canada (art, music, film, literature).
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian required.
#ITAL 2P99
Medieval and Renaissance Tales
(also offered as MARS 2P99)
Evolution and development of Novella Collections in Europe, emphasizing the Frame Tale function. Selections from Boccaccio, Chaucer, Marguerite de Navarre, Miguel de Cervantes, Maria de Zayas.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*ITAL 2Q90
Digital Archives: Construction, Scholarship and Functionality
(also offered as IASC 2Q90 and STAC 2Q90)
Digital archives, their functionality, development and role in Humanities research. Sites studied will range from library collections to single authors and artist projects, including museum and audio archives. Engagement in the creation of a digital archive.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian required.
*ITAL 2Q95
Queer Stories in Italy and the West
(also offered as WGST 2Q95)
Expression and treatment of sexual and gender diversity in Italy through theories of gender and sexuality, literature, theatre, and film. Themes include colonialism, activism, migration, and the tensions within Italys social movements. Exploration of topics through comparisons and connections between Italy and other parts of the Western world.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English
#ITAL 2Q96
History of the Roman Republic
(also offered as CLAS 2Q96 and HIST 2Q96)
History of Rome to the Battle of Actium (31 BC), emphasis on social and political developments from the Gracchi to Julius Caesar.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: CLAS 1P92 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS (HIST/ITAL) 3P05.
*ITAL 3F50
Reading the Italian Medieval and Renaissance City
(also offered as HIST 3F50, MARS 3F50 and VISA 3F50)
Exploring key monuments, churches, museums and urban sites. Concept of the city as expressed through art, literature and architecture from Medieval to Baroque times. Historical and geographical influences and factors in shaping the city, its culture and traditions. Cities include Rome, Assisi, Florence and Siena.
Prerequisite(s): one ITAL, HIST, MARS or VISA credit or permission of the course co-ordinator.
Note: offered in Italy during Spring session. Given in English. No knowledge of Italian is needed. Course begins in May on campus during the Spring Evening session (3-4 weeks). Departure for Italy: end of May or beginning of June for a two-week study tour of Rome, Assisi, Florence and Siena. Students are responsible for travel, accommodation and other expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ITAL (VISA) 2F99 and ITAL (MARS/VISA) 3M50.
ITAL 3M20-3M24
Special Topics in Italian
Special topic in an area not represented by other courses.
#ITAL 3P09
The Later Roman Empire
(also offered as CLAS 3P09 and MARS 3P09)
History of the Roman Empire from the death of Marcus Aurelius to late Antiquity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 1P92, 2P97, 3P23.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ITAL 4P55.
#ITAL 3P22
Art and Architecture of the Roman Republic and Early Empire
(also offered as CLAS 3P22 and VISA 3P22)
Art and architecture of the cultures of the Italian peninsula, in the first millennium BC, within the framework of cultural change and external influences.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from CLAS or VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 recommended.
#ITAL 3P23
Art and Architecture of the Roman Empire
(also offered as CLAS 3P23 and VISA 3P23)
Roman art and architecture from Augustus to Late Antiquity. Christian art and architecture and the influence of Roman aesthetics on the Renaissance and beyond.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from CLAS or VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 recommended.
ITAL 3P90
Literature of the 19th Century
Literary and cultural movements of the 1800s; socio-cultural issues in pre- and post-Unification Italy. Authors may include Manzoni, Foscolo, Leopardi and Verga.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English.
*ITAL 3P92
Petrarch and Boccaccio
(also offered as MARS 3P92)
Literature, arts and culture of the Middle Ages emphasizing Petrarch's Canzoniere (Song Book) and Boccaccio's Decameron, and the works and genres that they influenced.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one ITAL, MARS credit or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian is required.
*ITAL 3P93
Dante's Inferno
(also offered as MARS 3P93)
Dante's Divine Comedy and the world it created and reflected focusing on the Inferno. References to relevant visual arts (illustrations and adaptations of the Divine Comedy by such artists as Dor, Rodin and the Pre-Raphaelites).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian is required.
ITAL 3P94
Modern and Contemporary Italian Literature in Translation
Overview of the trends and genres in Italian literature during the 20th and 21st centuries. Representative writings selected from major novelists, short-story writers and poets, such as Pirandello, Montale, Moravia, Calvino, Morante and Eco.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English.
ITAL 3P97
Italian for Teachers
Approaches to the teaching of Italian as a second language. Teaching methods, educational materials and multi-media resources.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ITAL 2F00 and one ITAL credit numbered 2(alpha)00 or above or permission of instructor.
ITAL 3Q91
Grammar, Composition and Conversation
Language practice through written compositions, analyses of texts, discussions and presentations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ITAL 2F00 or permission of instructor.
ITAL 4P04
Translation: Applications
Translation practice. Interrelationships between English and Italian. Application of translation methodologies to a variety of texts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ITAL 2F00 or permission of instructor.
INTERNSHIP COURSE
ITAL 3Q90
Translating and Interpreting in the Community: An Internship
May include health care, tourism, wine industry, judicial services and business.
Tutorial, 1.5 hours per week plus internship placement time.
Restriction: open to ITAL (single or combined) majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): ITAL 2F00 and 2P90.
Note: enrolment will be limited to the number of placements available. Italian Minors will be considered in exceptional cases. Students will be interviewed in Italian in order to select appropriate placements. Participation is required in an orientation to the co-op experience, goal setting, and resume and interview skills preparation. Part-time internship in a business where Italian is used. Students will be placed in the community for experiential learning.
Administrative Assistant
Violetta Clitheroe
905-688-5550, extension 3312
Glenridge 573A, Room 263
brocku.ca/modernlanguages
The Department aims to provide students with extensive knowledge of the spoken and written Italian language, literature and culture. Internship and experiential learning opportunities are also available. In addition to the courses taught in the language, the Italian Studies program provides courses in Cinema, Culture, Art and Architecture taught in English. As well, the Department offers a series of courses taught in English (designated SCLC) that may be acceptable for credit toward a degree in Italian Studies. Students are encouraged to participate in one or more of the study programs in Italy.

57

Kinesiology
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
KINESIOLOGY COURSES
KINE 1P90
Human Systems Anatomy
Human anatomy using a systemic approach, emphasizing the functional aspects of gross and histologic anatomy.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors.
Note: materials fee required. Students may not concurrently register in KINE 1P99 and/or HLSC 2P95.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 1P99, HLSC 2F95 and 2P95.
KINE 1P98
Musculoskeletal Anatomy
Overview of the musculoskeletal system including the anatomical features of bones and muscles, joint actions, skeletal and muscular movements, the spinal cord, and appendicular peripheral nerves and blood vessels.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors.
Note: materials fee required. Students may not concurrently register in HLSC 2P96.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2F95 and 2P96.
KINE 1P99
Foundations of Human Anatomy and Physiology
Structure and function of human systems and organs. Topics include cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, renal and reproductive systems and muscle physiology. Introduction to fitness, health and physical activity effects.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NURS and RECL majors until date specified in Registration Guide. Not open to BKin, BPhEd, BphEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior Intermediate), BSc(Kin), BMED, MSCI and NMTR majors.
Note: may be offered online. Students may not concurrently register in KINE 1P90 and/or HLSC 2P95.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 1P90, HLSC 2F95 and 2P95.
KINE 2F00
Fundamental Movement Skills
Educational and developmental value of non-formal and foundational games, gymnastics and dance activities. Emphasis on developing the creative process, skills and vocabulary through exploration of movement concepts and instructional/observational skills. Practical and theoretical work.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93.
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation will typically include vigorous physical activity.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 2P00, 2P03 and 2P06.
KINE 2P05
Foundations of Motor Behaviour
Introduction to the neural processes involved in the production and learning of motor skills.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93 or 1P98.
KINE 2P08
Research Design in Kinesiology
Principles and techniques for research design.  Emphasis on development of research literacy skills.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin majors, and BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Note: may be offered online or as a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 2P07 and SPMA 1P97 (2P07).
KINE 2P09
Human Physiology
Molecular, cellular, tissue and organ physiology. Topics include cellular communication, autonomic nervous system, endocrinology, blood cells and immunity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) and NURS majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93 or 1P98, or KINE 1P99 (for NURS majors)
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2P09.
KINE 2P19
Coaching Theory
Comprehensive introduction to coaching principles, including sport psychology, training principles, sport pedagogy and risk management.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Note: may be offered as a blended format. Additional fees for certification are required. NCCP registration must be completed by first lecture.
KINE 2P20
Introduction to Nutrition
Human nutrition as it relates to physical activity, health and disease. Processes of nutrient digestion, absorption and metabolism, as well as energy balance and body composition.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93 or 1P98.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2P91 and 2P92.
#KINE 2P40
Ancient Sport and Spectacle
(also offered as CLAS 2P40)
Sport and sporting values and their central role in ancient society. Topics include sporting events and facilities, sporting festivals, religious and political connections, intellectual and popular attitudes, a comparison of ancient and modern realities and values.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
KINE 2P41
Health and Physical Activity Promotion
Decision-making process related to delivery of health education and education information including problems associated with ability to function.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin majors, and BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
KINE 2P44
Physical Activity and Aging
Contribution of human movement and mobility to the well-being and quality of life of aging populations. Review of principles, practice and programs for seniors related to the concept of wellness. Myths, needs and movement potential of aging persons.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) majors and GERO minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
KINE 2P65
Sport and Mental Health
Role of sport participation on mental health. Emphasis on intervention strategies to promote mental health of athletes.
Lecture, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Note: may be offered as a blended format.
KINE 2P84
Human Growth and Development
Examination of human growth and development emphasizing physical, motor and psycho-social development in children and adolescents.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93 or 1P98.
Note: may be offered as a blended format
KINE 2P85
Psychology of Health Behaviours
Biological, psychological and social aspects of health and health risk behaviours at the individual and group level. Topics include physical activity, nutrition, stress, substance use and rehabilitation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Note: may be offered as a blended format.
KINE 2P90
Exercise Physiology
Examination of the body's physiological responses to exercise and adaptation to training. Topics may include bioenergetics, metabolism, skeletal muscle physiology and cardiorespiratory responses to acute and chronic exercise.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P09.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 2P97.
KINE 2P91
Social History of Physical Education and Sport
Socio-cultural evolution of physical activity in North America emphasizing Canada; relationship with social, cultural, religious and political history.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93 or 1P98.
Note: may be offered as a blended format.
KINE 2P92
Foundations in Adapted Physical Education and Disability Studies
Life conditions and needs of persons who require individualized physical activity.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93 or 1P98.
Note: field placement requirement. Transportation is a student responsibility. A police check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required at the students expense. May be offered online.
#KINE 2P93
Beauty, Bodies and Cultures
(also offered as SOCI 2P93 and WGST 2P93)
Intersectional examination of the social constructions of beauty and the regulation of bodies in historical and contemporary periods, as well as in national and global contexts. Topics may include fashion, fitness and cosmetic industries, eating disorders, representations of racialized others, plastic surgery and genital surgeries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade obtained in WGST (SOCI) 3P03.
*KINE 2P95
Sport Psychology
(also offered as PSYC 2P95)
Interaction between psychology and behaviour in sport.  Understanding individual and team optimal performance and athlete development.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open toBKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) BSc (Kin) majors and PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration Guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
KINE 3P00
Individual and Dual Formal Games
Similarities and differences in individual and dual formal games are learned through a conceptual analysis of skills, rules and strategies. Practical and theoretical work will be performed to facilitate such learning.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2F00 (KINE 2P00).
Note: lab fee required; consult the Department. Modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity.
KINE 3P02
Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription Across the Lifespan
Techniques of physical fitness appraisal, health assessment, exercise prescription and lifestyle counselling, and their theoretical base and clinical application.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P90 or 2P97.
KINE 3P03
Gymnastics
Application of gymnastic-type skills across a wide variety of activities and environments.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2F00 (KINE 2P03).
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity.
KINE 3P05
Motor Learning
Theoretical and practical application of practices that facilitate the acquisition of motor skills across the lifespan, including coaching, rehabilitation and vocational contexts.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P05.
KINE 3P06
Dance as Cultural Reflection
Theory and practice of dance as an artistic, educational, recreational and therapeutic endeavour in relation to a wide variety of cultures, environments and contexts.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), DART and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2F00 (KINE 2P06) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will be expected to pay the cost of a ticket to a dance performance on campus. Modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity.
KINE 3P08
Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative means of understanding, evaluating and interpreting statistical information.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P08 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or as a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 3Q07 and SPMA 3P07.
KINE 3P10
Biomechanics
Basic mechanical principles and concepts as applied to human movement. Focus on the characteristics of movement from both a qualitative and quantitative perspective.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P98, or HLSC 2P95, 2P96 (HLSC 2F95) and NEUR 2P36 (NMTR majors).
KINE 3P13
Fitness Activities
Theoretical and applied principles related to low and high impact activities.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P05 or permission of the instructor.
Note: lab fee required; consult Department. Field experience is required. Transportation is a student responsibility. Modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity.
*KINE 3P14
Aquatics
(also offered as RECL 3P14)
Educational and developmental aquatics applications. Activities may include swimming and other water based experiences to develop physically literate, versatile, adaptive, and lifespan approaches.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Junior/Intermediate), and RECL majors and minors until date specified in the Registration guide.  After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), RECL majors and minors. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation typically include vigorous activity in deep and shallow water.
KINE 3P18
Qualitative Approaches to Inquiry
Theories, approaches, designs, methods and procedures for evaluative analyses.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BKin and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P08.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 3P37, RECL 3Q17 and SPMA 3P17.
KINE 3P32
Movement Activities for Physical Education in the School
Sequential skill and knowledge development for children and adolescents through various movement forms appropriate in educational settings. Movement education principles applied to the observation, analysis and selection of activities.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2F00 (one credit from KINE 2P00, 2P03, 2P06).
Note: in-school experience is required for all students. Transportation is a student responsibility. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required at the student's expense.
KINE 3P41
Communications in Health
Role of communication in the promotion of health and well-being, emphasizing applied theories and professional techniques for talking and listening.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
KINE 3P65
Interventions in Physical Activity
Evidence-based physical activity intervention strategies with attention to individual, informational, social, behavioural and environmental approaches.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P85 or 2P95.
Note: may be offered online or as a blended format.
KINE 3P70
Sociology of Sport I
Social significance of physical education and sport. Topics include social organizations, stratification, deviance, race, gender and the media.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 1P93 or 1P98.
KINE 3P80
Care and Prevention of Injuries
Treatment, recognition and prevention of musculo-skeletal injuries; the interrelationship of anatomy, physiology and kinesiology, and their application including emergency care and preventative taping. Emphasis on risk management strategies and safety practices in sport.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P98 and KINE 2P05.
Note: materials fee may be required.
Completion of this course will replace a previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 3P80.
KINE 3P85
Exercise Psychology
Psychological influences on exercise behaviour and the influence that physical activity can have on the individual's behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
KINE 3P90
Cardiorespiratory and Environmental Exercise Physiology
Examination of cardiovascular and respiratory systems in relation to exercise, training and health. Environmental physiology from rest to exercise. Exercise and the immune response. Recent advances in applied physiology.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P09.
KINE 3P91
Training Principles
Current theories and practices in a variety of training contexts, formats and modalities. Training as applied to a broad age and ability spectrum; movement education principles applied to the observation, analysis and program design.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P98; KINE 2P90 or 2P97.
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity.
KINE 3P92
Physiological Consequence of Spinal Cord Injury and Rehabilitative Techniques
Secondary health complications accompanying spinal cord injury. Current exercise and drug-related therapies used as rehabilitative strategies for this special population.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc(Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90 or HLSC 2P95; KINE 2P09 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 4P96.
KINE 3P93
History and Philosophy of Physical Activity and Sport
Blended inquiry of the antecedents and philosophical relevance of physical activity and sport.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P91 or 3P70.
KINE 3P94
Motor Control
Neural organization and processes underlying the generation of human movement.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BSc (Kin) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) and NEUR majors. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P05 or NEUR 2P36 (NMTR majors).
KINE 3P95
Applied Sport Psychology
Application of psychological factors that influence participation and performance in sport. Topics include confidence, attentional control and teambuilding.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P95.
KINE 3P97
Exercise Physiology in Aging and Disease
Effects of exercise and training on chronic conditions. Focusing on musculoskeletal, metabolic and cognitive health.
Lectures, labs, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)BEd (Intermediate Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), BMED, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, NMTR and PHTH.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P09 or HLSC 2P09; KINE 2P90 or KINE 2P97
KINE 3P98
Functional Anatomy
Exploration of the structure and function of bones, joints and muscles through palpation, tissue stress testing and movement problems related to physical activity and to the workplace.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd(Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd(Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P98 (minimum 75 percent).
Note: materials fee may be required.
KINE 3P99
Special Studies in Physical Education and Kinesiology
Directed study in specialized areas.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average and permission of the Department.
Note: approval of a faculty member and the Chair required.
KINE 3Q32
Movement Programming for Children
Developing and implementing educational movement programming for children from the pre-school through elementary school years.
Lectures, field work, 4 hrs per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in the Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2F00 or permission of the instructor
Note: weekend field experience is required. Students are expected to serve as leaders in the Children's Movement Program. A police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required at the student's expense.
KINE 4F16
Exercise Programming for Neuromuscular Disability
Developing and implementing strength training, aerobic training and locomotor training for community members with a spinal cord injury.
Lectures, 1 hour per week; field work, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P09.
Note: KINE 3P92 (4P96) is recommended as prerequisite or co-requisite. Field placement is required. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required at the student's expense.
KINE 4F90
Laboratory or Experience Based Research
Limited research project involving field or laboratory study under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd(Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd(Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average, minimum 60 percent non-major average and permission the Department.
Corequisite(s): KINE 4F91.
Note: prior to registration students must submit a written proposal for approval by a faculty member and the Chair by June 1.
KINE 4F91
Thesis/Project
Directed study in an approved area of specialization.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average, minimum 60 percent non-major average and permission of the Chair.
Note: prior to registration students must submit a written proposal for approval by a faculty adviser and the Chair by June 1.
KINE 4P00
Team Formal Games
Similarities and differences in team formal games are learned through a conceptual analysis of skills, rules and strategies. Practical and theoretical work will be performed to facilitate such learning.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2F00 (KINE 2P00).
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity.
KINE 4P01
Occupational Ergonomics
Occupational and industrial environments, emphasizing physical demands in the workplace and how people become injured at work. Biomechanical, physiological and psychophysical assessment of workplace tasks, mechanisms of work-related injuries, workplace assessment of injury risk, pre-employment screening and legislated guidelines.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P09 and 3P10 or permission of the instructor.
KINE 4P02
Programming for Disability and at-Risk Youth
Planning and implementing therapeutic activity and exercise. Engagement with community-based youth and direct contact placement.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P92.
Note: additional field placement required. Transportation is a student responsibility. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required at the student's expense. May be offered online or as a blended format.
KINE 4P05
Cognitive Ergonomics
Evidenced-based examination of human-machine systems that impact motor performance. The role of human factors in the design and measurement of these human-machine systems.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration Guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd(Honours)/BEd(Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd(Honours)BEd(Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), CHLH, CMTY, HLSC and PHTH majors until date specified in Registration Guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P05 or permission of the instructor.
KINE 4P08
Nutritional Implications for Sport and Human Performance
Nutritional intake and its effects on sport and human performance emphasizing the importance of macronutrients timing of intake, and ergogenic aids, during training and competition. Emphasis on current issues in clinical and applied sport nutrition, special populations and basic nutritional biochemistry.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P20; KINE 2P90 or 2P97 or permission of the instructor.
KINE 4P10
Clinical Biomechanics
Mechanics of human movement with applications to ergonomics, rehabilitation and sport. Focus on two-dimensional kinetics and kinematics, with an introduction to three-dimensional analysis of movement.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab 3 hours bi-weekly.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P10.
Note: PHYS 1P91 recommended.
KINE 4P11
Sport Ethics
Applied ethical analysis of competition, fair play, violence, performance-enhancing drugs, genetic technology, equality, gender equity, interuniversity sport, commercialization and sport as moral education.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P91 or 3P70.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 4P08.
KINE 4P12
Exercise Programming for Older Adults
Developing and implementing exercise and balance training for community seniors. Experiential learning in physical activity program.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd(Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Note: field placement requirement. A police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required at the student's expense.KINE 2P44 recommended.
KINE 4P13
Meditative and Martial Arts
Engagement with a variety of movement forms, such as Tai Chi and Yoga as well as other martial arts forms. Development of physical literacy, pedagogic, adaptive, therapeutic and fitness strategies for participation across the lifespan.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P90; KINE 1P93 or 1P98
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation will typically include vigorous physical activity.
KINE 4P19
Advanced Coaching Theory
Development of athletic abilities, analyzing performance, advanced practice planning, designing a basic sport program and supporting competitive experiences.
Lec/labs 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) until date specified in the Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P19
Note: may be offered as a blended format. Additional fees for certification required. NCCP registration must be completed by first lecture.
KINE 4P22
Therapeutic Applications of Physical Activity
Fitness assessment, program design and implementation using an individualized approach with a client from the general population. Emphasis on problem solving and critical thinking in a problem-based learning format.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 1P98 and KINE 2P09.
Note: field experience required. May be offered online or as a blended format.
KINE 4P31
Reflective Practice in Physical Education
Processes involved in becoming reflective practitioners. Processes of teaching and development of reflective awareness related to practitioner conduct.
Lectures, field work, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered in a blended format.
KINE 4P32
Teaching and Learning in School-Based Physical Education
Development and delivery of physical education programs for children and adolescents, based upon the Ontario Health and Physical Education Curriculum.
Lectures, lab, fieldwork, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P32.
Note: in-school experience is required for all students. Transportation is a student's responsibility. A police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required at the student's expense.
KINE 4P40
Cultural Studies of Sport and Leisure
Theory and practice of cultural studies related to sport and leisure, focusing on contemporary issues.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P91 or 3P70.
KINE 4P60
Sociology of the Modern Olympic Games
Social and political issues including historical trends in the Olympic movement, power and organizational structure of the International Olympic Committee, media integration, gender equity, substance use, athletes' rights and the role of the Olympic Games in globalization and international development.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P91 or 3P70.
KINE 4P61
Sport, Development and Sustainability
Sports role as an agent of social change in relation to matters of underdevelopment and environmental degradation, from a variety of perspectives including theoretical, sociological, post-colonial and Indigenous knowledges.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P91 or KINE 3P70
KINE 4P65
Physical Activity Counselling for Kinesiologists
Acquisition and development of motivational interviewing skills used by kinesiologists to optimize physical activity behaviour change.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin and BSc (Kin) majors until the date specified in the Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P08 or permission of the instructor.
Note: KINE 3P85 recommended.
KINE 4P70
Sociology of Sport II
Sport as a microcosm of society, socio-political theories, religion, culture, socially structured inequalities and excesses in sport.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P91 or 3P70.
KINE 4P71
Healthcare Ethics
Applied ethics in the health care system from a professional kinesiology perspective by examining concepts, theories and case studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
KINE 4P80
Clinical Practices in Athletic Therapy
Emphasis on musculo-skeletal evaluation, rehabilitation principles, therapeutic exercise and modalities, patient management skills and taping used in clinical settings. Focus on ankle and lower leg injuries.
Lectures, internship, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P80 (2P70) (minimum 75 percent).
Note: clinical internship required. Enrolment limited to 22 students. Materials fee may be required.
KINE 4P81
Clinical Assessments in Athletic Therapy
Emphasis on musculo-skeletal evaluation and rehabilitation of sports injuries to the remaining peripheral joints of the lower and upper extremity. Functional and surface anatomy is stressed with clinical applications for rehabilitation.
Lectures, internship, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 4P80.
Note: clinical internship required. Enrolment limited to 22 students. Materials fee may be required.
KINE 4P82
Practicum in Athletic Therapy
Experiential learning in athletic therapy. Hands on experience facilitating the care of athletes before, during and after athletic events under the supervision of the athletic therapy clinic staff.
Lectures, field work, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P80 (2P70) (minimum 75 percent).
KINE 4P84
Children's Response to Physical Activity and Exercise
Children's exercise capacity and physiological response to physical activity and exercise in terms of the different body systems (e.g., cardiovascular, musculoskeletal). Emphasis on differences in responses between children and adults.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P84; KINE 2P90 or 2P97.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
KINE 4P85
Body Image
Body image from a cognitive behavioral perspective. Issues related to measurement, theories and disturbance. Group and individual differences and body image interventions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
KINE 4P86
Internship in Fitness and Conditioning
Field experience in a variety of applied settings.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty member and the Chair.
Note: enrolment is limited and dependent upon availability of faculty advisers. Students are responsible for organizing their own placement which must be external to Brock University, and for any additional expenses which may include transportation costs and/or a police record check with a vulnerable sector screening, if required by the placement agency. Internship forms can be obtained from the Department.
KINE 4P87
Internship in Coaching
Field experience in a variety of applied settings.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty member and the Chair.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P19 and permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment is limited and dependent upon availability of faculty advisers. Students are responsible for organizing their own placement which must be external to Brock University, and for any additional expenses which may include transportation costs and/or a police record check with a vulnerable sector screening, if required by the placement agency. Internship forms can be obtained from the Department.
KINE 4P88
Internship in Athlete Development
Field experience in a variety of applied settings.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty member and the Chair.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P02 or 3P91.
Note: enrolment is limited and dependent upon availability of faculty advisers. Students are responsible for organizing their own placement which must be external to Brock University, and for any additional expenses which may include transportation costs and/or a police record check with a vulnerable sector screening, if required by the placement agency. Internship forms can be obtained from the Department.
KINE 4P89
Internship in Clinical Kinesiology and Rehabilitation
Clinical/field experience in a variety of applied settings.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd and BSc (Kin) majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of a faculty member and the Chair.
Note: enrolment is limited and dependent upon availability of faculty advisers. Students are responsible for organizing their own placement which must be external to Brock University, and for any additional expenses which may include transportation costs and/or a police record check with a vulnerable sector screening, if required by the placement agency. Internship forms can be obtained from the Department.
KINE 4P91
High Performance Athletic Assessment and Training
Theoretical and practical fundamental principles underlying training as they apply to high performance athletic assessment and training. Active participation, development, implementation and critical evaluation of selected performance-specific assessment protocols, conditioning and individualized training programs.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P91 (minimum 75 percent).
Note: performance in activity labs and fieldwork in applied setting is required. Modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity.
KINE 4P93
Physical Activity Across the Lifespan
Application of theoretical knowledge in the development and delivery of diverse movement programs.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2F00 (one credit from KINE 2P00, 2P03, 2P06).
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation will normally include vigorous physical activity. Field placement is required for all students. Transportation is a student responsibility. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required at the student's expense. Field experience fee may be charged; consult Department.
Completion of this course will replace a previously assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 4F93.
KINE 4P94
Balance and Gait
Examination of the neural processes involved in the control of balance and gait. Emphasis on assessment and rehabilitation strategies associated with age and pathological conditions.
Lectures, lab, seminar 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P94 or PSYC 2P36 and 2P37.
*KINE 4P95
Gender and Sport
(also offered as WGST 4P95)
Historical and current issues informed by gender studies, theories and politics. The shaping of experiences through the practices of sport and gender.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
KINE 4P97
Regulation of Human Metabolism
Physiological approach to understanding the integration of substrate supply to skeletal muscle and energy production by muscle cells during exercise of different intensities emphasizing current research in human metabolic regulation.
Lectures, 3 hours, per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 2P90 or 2P97.
KINE 4P98
Functional Assessment of Neuromuscular System
Muscle electrical activity during voluntary contractions and by peripheral nerve stimulation for the life sciences. Techniques for measuring, analyzing, and interpreting muscle electrical activity for both clinical and kinesiological applications.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 2 hours bi-weekly.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 3P10, 3P90 and 3P94.
KINE 4P99
Advanced Topics in Physical Education and Kinesiology
Directed study in concentrated areas.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/Bed (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin) majors and GERO minors with 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average and permission of the Department.
Note: approval of a faculty member and the Chair required.
#KINE 4Q90
Foundations of Collaboration and Teamwork
(also offered as HLSC 4Q90, NUSC 4Q90, RECL 4Q90 and SPMA 4Q90)
Core competencies for effective teamwork. Topics include collaborative leadership, team functioning, communication, role clarity, conflict management, and client-centered approach as it applies to a diversity of interprofessional settings.
Lecture, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), CHHS, BMED, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, NUBR, NUSC, RECL and SPMA majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
CO-OP COURSES
KINE 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to BKin Co-op students.
KINE 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provides student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Prerequisite(s): KINE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): KINE 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING COURSE
KINE 1P93
Foundations of Movement Studies
Historical and sociological examination of systems of body culture and movement education in Europe and North America. Applications of movement concepts and theories to contemporary physical education.
Lectures, lab, 3.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Administrative Assistant
Ginny McKinney
905-688-5550, extension 4957
Walker Complex 288A
brocku.ca/kin
The Department of Kinesiology offers a 20-credit Bachelor of Kinesiology (BKin) degree, a Bachelor of Science in Kinesiology (BSc (Kin)) degree and a direct entry Bachelor of Kinesiology (BKin)/Masters of Professional Kinesiology (MPK) degree. It also offers a 20 credit Bachelor of Physical Education (BPhEd) and six-year Concurrent Bachelor of Physical Education (Honours)/Bachelor of Education (BPhEd (Honours)/BEd) Intermediate/Senior and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd Junior/Intermediate degrees.
Requirement for graduation with a BKin (Honours), BSc (Kin) (Honours) or BPhEd (Honours) degree is a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average. Requirement for graduation with a BKin, BSc (Kin) with Major or BPhEd with Major degree is a minimum 60 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent overall average.
Students who are entering into Years 2 and 3 are eligible to submit new applications to the BKin, BSc(Kin) or BPhEd programs. Application forms must be completed and returned to the office by May 15. These are limited enrolment programs. Admission is not guaranteed by attainment of the minimum requirements.
The BKin degree focuses on the biophysical, behavioural and socio-cultural aspects of kinesiology and is based on a science-practice model that prepares students for selected certification in the allied health professions emphasizing bioscience courses, the development of research skills and the application of theoretical knowledge in laboratory settings.
The BSc (Kin) degree focuses on the biophysical aspects of kinesiology and prepares students for careers in various health professions. This bioscience degree is designed for the student who wishes to concentrate on the science of human movement and prepares students to meet the requirements for postgraduate degree programs in biophysical kinesiology and the allied health professions.
The Accelerate into Masters (AIM) program allows a limited number of students (10 per year) direct entry into both a four year BKin and a one year Masters of Professional Kinesiology (MPK) allowing for the completion of two degrees within five years. Students may also choose to decline the MPK program following the completion of their BKin degree to accommodate for changes to their career and/or academic aspirations.
Students in this program must continue to meet current BKin criteria to remain in the program (see program notes). Continued admissibility into the MPK requires a minimum overall average of 78 per cent in the final two years of the BKin degree (see https://brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/master-of-professional-kinesiology/).
The BPhEd degree provides students with a broadly based understanding of the discipline through theoretical and practical courses in physical education. This program allows maximum opportunity for students to pursue various combinations of courses in teaching, coaching, programming and administration within their particular areas of interest (see Physical Education Subfields).
Successful graduates of the Concurrent BPhEd (Honours)/BEd degree will receive an Honours Bachelor of Physical Education degree and a Bachelor of Education degree. The Dean of the Faculty of Education may recommend that the Ontario College of Teachers grant Ontario Certificate of Qualification certifying them to teach either Junior/Intermediate (grades 4-10) or Intermediate/Senior (grades 7-12).

58

Labour Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
LABOUR STUDIES COURSES
LABR 1P94
Workplace Rights and Equity
Introduction to workers' rights. Topics may include employment standards, workplace health and safety, and human rights protections.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR 1F90.
LABR 1P95
Introduction to the Canadian Labour Movement
Canada's labour movement. Topics may include the historical development of unions, collective bargaining, unions in society and assessments of union effectiveness.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR 1F90.
LABR 1P96
Labour Behind the Label
Introductory exploration of the global labour processes behind a number of everyday items such as a t-shirt, a cup of coffee, and a smart phone.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 1P97
The Future of Work
Introductory exploration of emerging trends, patterns, and issues related to the future of work. Topics may include artificial intelligence, technological displacement, workplace surveillance, and the rise of the gig economy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 2P00
Mediation, Arbitration and Conflict Resolution
Multidisciplinary exploration. Theoretical and practical skills-based components.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*LABR 2P03
Labour and Employment Law
(also offered as POLI 2P03)
Legal regulation of both union and non-union work in Canada. Topics may include employment standards, labour relations, human rights and labour relations boards.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#LABR 2P15
The Economics of Unions
(also offered as ECON 2P15)
Labour unions in the marketplace. How unions affect, and are affected by, the labour and product markets. Topics include the effects of unions on wages, fringe benefits, turnover, inequality, productivity and the profitability of firms; union behaviour; who belongs to unions and why; collective bargaining; strikes; interest arbitration; public-sector unionism.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 1P91 and 1P92.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#LABR 2P32
In and Out of Work in the Global Economy
(also offered as SOCI 2P32)
Examination of paid and unpaid work in industrialized and industrializing countries. Topics may include patterns of un/under employment, peripheral employment, home-working and worker resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be available on-site or online.
#LABR 2P71
Social Class and Social Conflict
(also offered as CRIM 2P71 and SOCI 2P71)
Classical and contemporary approaches to the study of social class. Topics may include class relations and class conflict, elites, social mobility, poverty and social marginalization, the Canadian class structure in comparison to other industrialized nations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or SOCI 1F90.
#LABR 2P80
Labour, Environment and Consumption
(also offered as SOCI 2P80)
Topics may include global comparative consumption patterns and the relation between labour and environmental interests.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
#LABR 2P86
Women, Gender and the Economy
(also offered as CANA 2P86, SOCI 2P86 and WGST 2P86)
Women in the Canadian labour market. Topics include allocation of time between the household and the labour market, gender segregation in the work place, how earnings are determined, causes of occupational and earning difference by gender, role of investment in education and discrimination, recent developments in the labour market and their impact on women and men, and selected policy issues.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits and a minimum 65 percent overall average.
Note: may be offered online.
*LABR 2P90
The Labour of Sport
(also offered as SPMA 2P90)
Critical approach to sport as labour and professional athletes as workers. Topics may include the history of labour organizing and labour relations in professional sports, collective bargaining, strikes and lockouts, and how axes of inequality, including race, gender and sexuality, shape athletes' experiences of work.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SPMA 1P91 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*LABR 2P92
Hip Hop and the Urban Working Class
(also offered as COMM 2P92 and PCUL 2P92)
Global urban working class life through the lens of hip hop culture. Topics may include the impact of neoliberal globalization, precarious work, the informal economy, and the ways in which race, class and gender shape experiences of social and economic life in the global city.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR 2P91.
LABR 2P93
History of the Global Working Class
Development of the global working class. Topics include the origins of capitalism, diverse forms of working class politics and resistance, the history of international working class solidarity, and how race, gender and geography have structured working class experience and collective action.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from LABR numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, HIST 1F95, 1F96, 1P99.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#LABR 2P96
Women, Gender and Development
(also offered as SOCI 2P96 and WGST 2P96)
Theoretical paradigms of development (economic development, sustainable development and women/gender in development) and the debates surrounding them.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P96.
*LABR 2Q92
Work, Equity and Diversity
(also offered as WGST 2Q92)
How various inequalities, such as those based on gender, race, ethnicity, nation, sexuality, ability and citizenship status, are reproduced and resisted in workplaces, workers' organizations, employment policy, and projects of change.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 2Q94
Class, Country Music, and Social Change
Multidisciplinary analysis of the intersections between class, country music, and social and cultural changes in North America. Topics may include the history of the genre and subgenres; the cultural politics of country music; musicians as workers; and the ways in which race, ethnicity, gender and sexuality are presented in the genre.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*LABR 2Q95
Animals at Work
(also offered as SOCI 2Q95)
Examination of labour involving animals in historical, contemporary, and cross-cultural contexts. Topics may include class and animals, animals as workers, connections and tensions between the rural and urban, debates about workers' and animals' welfare, inter-species solidarity, agency, and political action.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, 1P80.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 2Q96
Labour and Health
Examination of how work affects health and vice versa. Topics may include workplace-rooted injuries, dangers and diseases; the psychological and emotional impacts of difficult and precarious work; health care workers' wellbeing, political action, and social roles; healthier work-lives and workplaces.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, GEOG 1F90, HLSC 1F25, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: may be offered onsite, online or blended.
#LABR 2Q98
Introduction to Canadian Public Administration
(also offered as COMM 2Q98 and POLI 2Q98)
Political, legal and managerial dimensions of public administration. Topics include the structure and management of public organizations; government reform; political-bureaucratic relations; human resources and budgetary processes; ethics and accountability.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
LABR 2V80-2V89
Selected Topics in Labour Studies
LABR 3F98
Tutorial in Labour Studies
Guided readings on a topic not covered in the program's regular course offerings.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Chair.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial.
*LABR 3P06
Class and Culture
(also offered as PCUL 3P06 and SOCI 3P06)
Intersectional and critical analysis of the cultural politics of class. Topics may include class experience and consciousness, class and labour in popular culture, the influence of class and culture on society, and cultures of resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, PCUL 2P20, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*LABR 3P13
The Politics of Labour
(also offered as POLI 3P13)
Critical, multidisciplinary, exploration of parliamentary and extra-parliamentary political activism in Canada's labour movement.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 3P18
Work and Racism
Racism, racialization, and work in Canadian and global context. Key theoretical approaches to racism and work and the social relations of race, class and gender under capitalism. Topics may include migrant work, employment equity, anti-racism, and the role of the labour movement in combatting racism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#LABR 3P24
Labour Economics
(also offered as ECON 3P24)
Economics of the labour market. Topics include the demand for labour, the supply of labour and investment in human capital. Policy applications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#LABR 3P25
Topics in Labour Economics
(also offered as ECON 3P25)
Topics vary from year to year and may include unemployment and the impact of unemployment insurance in the labour market, discrimination in the labour market, labour migration and the economic impact of immigration, economics of the family, the distribution of income and wealth in Canada, the economic impact of unions on wages and non-wage outcomes, issues in retirement and pensions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): ECON 2P21 or 2P23.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#LABR 3P33
The State and Economic Life
(also offered as POLI 3P33)
Ideological perspectives on the state-economy relationship; policy instruments including taxation, regulation and public ownership; alternative models of economic policy including socialism, Keynesianism and neo-liberalism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#LABR 3P35
Communities in Crisis
(also offered as SOCI 3P35)
Poverty, unemployment, personal upheaval and family relocation in the early 21st century and, within this context, the evolving individual and collective strategies to create vibrant communities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 3P40
Labour Studies Field Course
Issues facing workers and labour movements through field study.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): LABR 2P93 and two LABR credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#LABR 3P48
Wealth, Work and Power in the United States
(also offered as HIST 3P48)
Business, labour and the state in U.S. history, including the evolution of capitalism from home manufacture to mass production to the service sector, the rise of the modern corporation, changing nature of work, sexual and racial divisions of labour, public policy, class conflict, welfare capitalism, the Great Depression and New Deal, business and war, deindustrialization, globalization and free trade.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR(single or combined), HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and HIST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P16 recommended.
#LABR 3P66
Social Movements
(also offered as SOCI 3P66)
Survey of the impact of ideology on behaviour and the subsequent development of social movements or examinations of particular movements such as separatism, nationalism, fascism, Marxism or feminism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the Department Administrator.
#LABR 3P75
Canadian Labour History
(also offered as HIST 3P75)
Canadian workers and the labour movement from the mid-19th century to the present, combining studies of trade unions with the broader context of the social, community and political life of workers. How gender and race/ethnicity have shaped the working class experience.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined), HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 2P02 recommended.
LABR 3P90
Collective Bargaining
Bargaining simulation played by students assuming the role of union and management negotiators. Topics may include a survey of the nature, determinants and impact of collective bargaining in Canada, the procedural and substantive aspects of collective bargaining, grievance arbitration, and other dispute settlement procedures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
LABR 3P91
Labour Studies Theory and Methods
Examination of theoretical approaches and research techniques in Labour Studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 3P93
Good, Green and Humane Jobs
Theoretical and practical examination of jobs and employment sectors that benefit people, animals and the environment.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, GEOG 1F90, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: LABR 2Q95 recommended. Project-based. May be available on-site, online or blended.
LABR 3P94
Psychology of Work
Topics may include work-life balance, job satisfaction, workplace stress and coping mechanisms, attitudes towards unions, and sources of workplace co-operation and conflict.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, PSYC 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 3P98
Directed Studies I
Guided readings on a topic not covered in the program's regular course offerings.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise.
LABR 3P99
Directed Studies II
Guided readings on a topic not covered in the program's regular course offerings.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise.
*LABR 3Q92
Care Work and Intimate Labours
(also offered as WGST 3Q92)
Care work and other intimate labours including child care, elder care, domestic work and sex work. Examination of how relations of gender, race and class structure care work. Topics may include social reproduction, migration, global care chains, the welfare state and care workers' organizing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*LABR 3Q93
Labour in a Global and Comparative Perspective
(also offered as POLI 3Q93)
Transnational issues such as global capitalism, the environment and nature, trade, migration and labour organizing, and national case studies from regions such as the global south, Europe and Asia.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 , GEOG 1F90, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*LABR 3Q95
Sex Work and Sex Workers
(also offered as POLI 3Q95, SOCI 3Q95 and WGST 3Q95)
Examination of sex work, various theoretical perspectives on sex work and their social policy implications for sex workers. Topics may include prostitution, pornography, the political economy of sex work and sex worker union organizing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*LABR 3Q96
Children and Youth at Work
(also offered as CHYS 3Q96)
Multidisciplinary exploration of North American and international perspectives on child labour and youth in the labour market.
Lectures, seminars, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined) and CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, CHYS 1F90, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*LABR 3Q97
Public Sector Unions
(also offered as POLI 3Q97)
Multidisciplinary examination of public sector unionism in Canada. Topics include the origin and growth, collective bargaining and dispute resolution, privatization and contracting out, and public sector union political action.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
LABR 3V90-3V94
Special Topics in Labour Studies
Special topics courses not offered on a regular basis.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): One LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha) or permission of the instructor.
LABR 4F90
Honours Thesis
Independent research project under the supervision of a faculty advisor.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Corequisite(s): LABR 4F92.
Note: applicants to the thesis or practicum option are required to submit a detailed (one page minimum) letter of intent by March 31 of the preceding year.
LABR 4F91
Honours Practicum
Service as research associates with a local organization or trade union. Projects will vary with the needs of the organization/trade union.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Corequisite(s): LABR 4F92.
Note: applicants to the thesis or practicum option are required to submit a detailed (one page minimum) letter of intent by March 31 of the preceding year. The faculty facilitator, organization/trade union supervisor and student will negotiate a mutually satisfactory project and work schedule.
LABR 4F92
Honours Seminar
Facilitation of individual thesis proposals including the development of the research question, review of the relevant literature and the integration of theoretical perspectives with the appropriate methodological applications.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Corequisite(s): LABR 4F90 or 4F91.
*LABR 4P21
Labour and Social Justice Organizing
(also offered as SOCI 4P21)
Theory and praxis of labour and social justice organizing.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined) majors and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
Note: experiential learning component with students creating their own labour/social justice campaign or participating in an existing campaign.
*LABR 4P31
Women, Work and Leadership
(also offered as SOCI 4P31 and WGST 4P31)
Analysis of women's and feminist leadership theory and praxis through the lens of paid and unpaid work, combined with the development of students' own leadership skills through experiential learning opportunities.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined), SOCI (single or combined) and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
#LABR 4P32
Sociology of Work
(also offered as SOCI 4P32 and WGST 4P32)
Theoretical and research developments in the sociology of work. Topics may include the impact of technological innovation on the labour process, reconceptualizations of work and leisure, changes in the gendered nature of work, the role of the contemporary labour movement and international perspectives on labour and the labour force.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined), SOCI (single or combined) and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): two LABR or SOCI credits or permission of the Department Administrator.
Note: SOCI 2P32 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR (SOCI) 4F30.
#LABR 4P35
Gendered Patterns of Resistance and Survival
(also offered as SOCI 4P35 and WGST 4P35)
Examination of the ways in which women and men, separately and together, seek to resist and survive the social and economic turmoil of the early 21st century. Focus on individuals, families and communities, and resistance in the context of global economic reorganization. Topics may include case studies in the Niagara Peninsula.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined), SOCI (single of combined) and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration Guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
#LABR 4P37
Exploring Alternatives to Capitalism
(also offered as SOCI 4P37)
Topics may include socialism, anarchism, eco-feminism, co-operativism and social democracy. Theoretical and historical perspectives may be examined.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
*LABR 4P41
Labour Law and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms
(also offered as POLI 4P41)
Application of Charter rights and freedoms, notably expression and association, to labour law in Canada.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined) and POLS (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2F12 recommended for Political Science majors.
#LABR 4P53
Masculinities, Culture and Economy
(also offered as CRIM 4P53, SOCI 4P53 and WGST 4P53)
Theoretical and empirical issues of the relation between masculinities and cultural and economic processes and structures. May include ethnicity, racialization, sexuality, nationalism, popular culture, leisure, changes in work and the labour market, class formation, and regional identity.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined), CRIM, SOCI (single or combined) and WGST (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): two SOCI credits or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
#LABR 4P54
Business-Government Relations
(also offered as POLI 4P54)
Politics and management of relations between business organizations and governments in Canada, emphasizing current research and issues. Topics include theories of business-government relations, the legislative and regulatory environment of business, public enterprise and privatization, lobbying, and interaction among government, business, the media and labour.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR (single or combined), INPE and POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: also open to non-POLS majors with a relevant background in other disciplines and permission of the instructor.
LABR 4P92
Directed Studies I
Guided reading on a topic not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a participating Faculty member willing to supervise the course.
LABR 4P93
Directed Studies II
Guided reading on a topic not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a participating Faculty member willing to supervise the course.
CO-OP COURSES
LABR 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to LABR Co-op students.
LABR 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to LABR Co-op students.
LABR 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to LABR Co-op students.
LABR 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentation, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to LABR Co-op students.
LABR 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provides student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to LABR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): LABR 0N90.
Corequisite(s): LABR 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
LABR 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provides student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to LABR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): LABR 0N90.
Corequisite(s): LABR 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
LABR 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provides student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to LABR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): LABR 0N90.
Corequisite(s): LABR 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistant
Elizabeth Wasylowich
905-688-5550, extension 4753
Mackenzie Chown D411
brocku.ca/labourstudies
Our work determines how we spend many of our waking hours and it largely defines our position in society, our economic well-being and our self-image. It also defines the nature of our society and economy, since these are determined by the work efforts of individuals. Restructuring of the labour force, technological change, de-skilling, re-skilling, changing labour legislation, labour market segmentation, women's work and equality in the workplace are some of the issues that stimulate teaching and research in the Department of Labour Studies.
Given the complex and multifaceted nature of work, Labour Studies adopts a multi disciplinary approach to its study. Labour Studies offers four-year programs of study leading to a BA (Honours) Labour Studies, a BA with Major Labour Studies and a three-year Pass degree program. In addition students can combine Labour Studies with several other disciplines in a combined major program leading to a four-year BA (Honours) degree and a three-year BA Pass degree. The program provides a social science perspective on the study of work with the participation of the departments of Economics, Geography, History, Political Science and Sociology.
Students may earn a Concentration in Labour Studies by including Labour Studies and other approved courses, as part of their academic work leading to an Honours BA in Economics, Political Science or Sociology.

59

Mathematics and Statistics
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
MATHEMATICS COURSES
*MATH 1F92
Introductory Statistics
(also offered as STAT 1F92)
Description and comparison of data sets, linear regression analysis, basic probability theory, discrete probability distributions, binomial and normal distributions, Central Limit Theorem, confidence intervals and hypothesis tests on means and proportions, properties of t-, F- and chi-squared distributions, analysis of variance, inference on regression. Emphasis on interpretation of numerical results for all topics. Use of Minitab.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one grade 11 mathematics credit.
Note: designed for non-science majors. Concurrent enrolment in MATH/STAT 1P98 or in MATH/STAT 1P99 is not permitted and credits will not be counted. Major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH/STAT 1P98 and 1P99.
MATH 1P01
Calculus Concepts I
Differential calculus emphasizing on concepts and the use of both theory and computers to solve problems. Precalculus topics, limits, continuity and the intermediate value theorem, derivatives and differentiability, implicit differentiation, linear approximation, mean value theorem with proof and applications, max and min, related rates, curve sketching, l'Hospital's rule, antiderivatives, Riemann sums, FTC with proof, integration by substitution. Use of Maple.
Lectures, 4 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): two grade 12 mathematics credits including MCV4U or permission of the instructor.
Note: intended for mathematics majors and/or future teachers. Students must successfully complete the Mathematics Skills Test.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 1P05.
MATH 1P02
Calculus Concepts II
Integral calculus emphasizing concepts, theory and computers to solve problems. Further integration techniques. Applications to areas between curves, volumes, arc length and probabilities. Multivariable calculus: partial derivatives, optimization of functions of two variables. Sequences and series: convergence tests, Taylor and Maclaurin series and applications. Differential Equations: direction fields, separable equations, growth and decay, the logistic equation, linear equations. Use of Maple.
Lectures, 4 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P01, 1P05 or permission of instructor.
Note: intended for mathematics majors and/or future teachers.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 1P06.
MATH 1P05
Applied Calculus I
Differential calculus emphasizing problem solving, calculation and applications. Precalculus topics, limits and asymptotic analysis, continuity, derivatives and differentiability, implicit differentiation, linear approximation. Applications: slope, rates of change, maximum and minimum, convexity, curve sketching, L'Hospital's rule. Antiderivatives, integrals, fundamental theorem of calculus, integration by substitution. Use of a computer algebra system.
Lectures, 4 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): grade 12 Mathematics MHF4U or MATH 1P20.
Note: designed for students in the sciences, computer science, and future teachers. Students must successfully complete the Mathematics Skills Test.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 1P01.
MATH 1P06
Applied Calculus II
Integral calculus emphasizing problem solving, calculations and applications. Further techniques of integration. Areas between curves, volumes, arc length and probabilities. 1st order differential equations. Sequences and series: convergence tests, Taylor and Maclaurin series and applications. Use of computer algebra system.
Lectures, 4 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P01 or 1P05.
Note: designed for students in the sciences, computer science, and future teachers.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 1P02.
MATH 1P11
Linear Algebra I
Review of linear systems and matrix algebra. General determinants and applications. Complex numbers. Vector geometry in R2 to R3. Dot product, norm and projections, cross product, lines and planes. Finite-dimensional vector spaces (real and complex). Linear transformations from Rn to Rm; rank and kernels. Eigenvalues. Use of a computer algebra system.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): two grade 12 mathematics credits including MCV4U.
MATH 1P12
Applied Linear Algebra
Systems of linear equations with applications. Matrix algebra. Determinants. Vector geometry in R2 and R3 dot product, norm and projections, cross product, lines and planes. Complex numbers. Euclidean n-space. Linear transformations from Rn to Rm. Focus on applications of linear algebra to sciences and integrated use of a computer algebra system.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one grade 12 mathematics credit or permission of instructor.
Students will not receive earned credit for MATH 1P12 if MATH 1P11 has been successfully completed.
MATH 1P20
Introduction to Mathematics
Essential mathematics skills required for university mathematics courses. Sets, real and complex numbers, solutions of inequalities and equations, functions, inverse functions, composition of functions, polynomial functions, rational functions, trigonometry, trigonometric functions, trigonometric identities, exponential functions, logarithmic functions, mathematical induction, binomial theorem, vectors and matrices.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one grade 11 mathematics credit.
Note: not open to students with credit in any university calculus course. Cannot be used toward a Mathematics teachable subject at Brock.
MATH 1P40
Mathematics Integrated with Computers and Applications I
Exploration of ideas and problems in algebra, differential equations, and dynamical systems using computers. Topics include number theory, integers mod p, roots of equations, fractals, predator-prey models and the discrete logistic equation for population growth.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MATH (single or combined), MATH (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P01 or 1P05.
MATH 1P66
Mathematical Reasoning
Introduction to mathematical reasoning, logic and proofs including mathematical induction. Basics of set theory.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P20 or one grade 12 mathematics credit.
Note: MCB4U recommended.
MATH 1P67
Mathematics for Computer Science
Development and analysis of algorithms, complexity of algorithms, recursion solving recurrence relations and relations and functions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P66.
Corequisite(s): COSC 1P03.
MATH 1P70
Mathematics in Culture
Role of mathematics in past and contemporary cultures including applications to science, society and the arts. Topics may include the stock market, social media, cryptography, history of numbers, statistics in newspapers, game theory, music, epidemics, and mathematics in movies and television.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to Mathematics (single or combined) majors.
Note: major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors. Cannot be used toward a Mathematics teachable subject for programs at Brock.
MATH 1P97
Calculus With Applications
Lines, polynomials, logarithms and exponential functions; two-sided limits; rates of change using derivatives; max and min of functions using derivatives; higher derivatives and concavity; area under a curve using integrals; optimization of functions of two variables using partial derivatives; growth and decay using differential equations; applications to many different disciplines; use of computer algebra systems.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to Mathematics (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P20 or one grade 12 mathematics credit.
Note: may be available on site, online or blended. Designed for students in Biological Sciences, Biotechnology, Business, Earth Sciences, Economics, Environmental Geoscience, Geography and Medical Sciences. Not open to students with credit in any university calculus course. Major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors.
*MATH 1P98
Practical Statistics
(also offered as STAT 1P98)
Descriptive statistics; probability of events; counting rules; discrete and continuous probability distributions: binomial, Poisson and normal distributions; Central Limit Theorem; confidence intervals and hypothesis testing; analysis of variance; contingency tables; correlation and regression; emphasis on real-world applications throughout; use of statistical computer software.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to Mathematics (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one grade 12 mathematics course or MATH 1P20.
Note: designed for students in Biological Sciences, Biotechnology, Business, Earth Sciences, Economics, Environmental Geoscience and Medical Sciences. Concurrent enrolment in MATH/STAT 1P99 or in MATH/STAT 1F92 is not permitted and credit will not be counted. Major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH/STAT 1P99 and 1F92.
*MATH 1P99
Applied Statistics for Life Sciences
(also offered as STAT 1P99)
Visualization and interpretation of life science data using histograms, frequency tables, correlation and regression, and a variety of statistical measures; basic concepts of probability; applications of the binomial, Poisson and normal distributions; confidence intervals for proportions and means; hypothesis testing; contingency tables; introduction to ANOVA; emphasis on interpretation and use of Microsoft Excel software throughout.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one grade 12 mathematics course or MATH 1P20
Note: designed for students in the Life and Applied Health Sciences. Concurrent enrolment in MATH/STAT 1P98 or in MATH/STAT 1F92 is not permitted and credit will not be counted.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH/STAT 1P98 and 1F92.
MATH 2P03
Multivariable Calculus
Functions of two and three variables, partial derivatives, gradient, critical points, maxima and minima, Taylor expansion, inverse and implicit function theorems. Cartesian, polar, cylindrical and spherical coordinates. Curves and surfaces, parametric representation, tangent space. Two- and three-dimensional integration, line and surface integrals.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02, 1P06 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 2P04
Basic Concepts of Analysis
Sets; mappings, countability; properties of the real number system; inner product, norm, and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality; compactness and basic compactness theorems (Cantor's theorem, the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, the Heine-Borel theorem); connectedness; convergence of sequences; Cauchy sequences; continuous and uniformly continuous functions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03.
MATH 2P08
Ordinary Differential Equations
Linear and nonlinear differential equations. Basic existence and uniqueness theory. Analytical and numerical solution methods; asymptotic behaviour. Qualitative analysis of autonomous systems including periodic cycles and steady-states. Examples of conservative systems and dissipative systems. Modelling and applications of differential equations. Use of Maple.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02, 1P06 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 2P12
Linear Algebra II
General vector spaces. Basis and dimension. Row and column spaces. Rank and nullity; the dimension theorem. Real inner product spaces. Angles and orthogonality. Orthonormal bases. Gram-Schmidt process. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors and diagonalization. Linear transformations. Applications to differential equations and least square fitting. Use of a computer algebra system.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12.
MATH 2P13
Linear Algebra III - Advanced
Review and further study of vector spaces over arbitrary fields. General linear transformations. Kernel and range. Invertibility. Matrices of linear transformations. Similarity. Isomorphism. Complex vector spaces and inner product spaces. Unitary, normal, symmetric, skew-symmetric and Hermitian operators. Orthogonal projections and the spectral theorem. Bilinear and quadratic forms. Jordan canonical form.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P12.
MATH 2P40
Mathematics Integrated with Computers and Applications II
Theory and applications of mathematical modelling and simulation. Topics may include discrete dynamical systems, Monte-Carlo methods, stochastic models, the stock market, epidemics, analysis of DNA, chaotic dynamical systems, cellular automata and predator-prey.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02 or 1P06; MATH 1P40 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 2F40.
MATH 2P52
Principles of Mathematics for Primary and Junior Teachers
Mathematical concepts and ideas in number systems; geometry and probability arising in the Primary and Junior school curriculum.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Note: designed to meet the mathematics admission requirement for the Primary/Junior Pre-service program of the Faculty of Education at Brock University. Not open to students holding credit in any grade 12 or university mathematics course.
MATH 2P75
Introductory Financial Mathematics
Mathematical models arising in finance and insurance. Compound interest, the time-value of money, annuities, mortgages, insurance, measures of risk. Introduction to stocks, bonds and options.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97, MATH/STAT 1P98.
*MATH 2P81
Probability
(also offered as STAT 2P81)
Probability, events, algebra of sets, independence, conditional probability, Bayes' theorem; random variables and their univariate, multivariate, marginal and conditional distributions. Expected value of a random variable, the mean, variance and higher moments, moment generating function, Chebyshev's theorem. Common discrete and continuous distributions: Binomial, Poisson, hypergeometric, normal, uniform and exponential. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02, 1P06 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be taken concurrently with MATH 2P03.
*MATH 2P82
Mathematical Statistics I
(also offered as STAT 2P82)
Random sampling, descriptive statistics, Central Limit Theorem, sampling distributions related to normality; point estimation: measurements for estimation performance, methods of moments, maximum likelihood, ordinary/weighted least squares; confidence intervals, testing procedures, and their relation for population means, difference between means, variances, ratio of variances, proportions and difference between proportions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 2P81.
MATH 2P90
Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometry I
Development of Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry from Euclid to the 19th century. Deductive nature of plane Euclidean geometry as an axiomatic system, central role of the parallel postulate and general consideration of axiomatic systems for geometry in general and non-Euclidean geometry in particular. Introduction to transformation geometry. Use of Geometer's Sketchpad.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one MATH or STAT credit.
MATH 2P91
Discrete Optimization
Problems and methods in discrete optimization. Linear programming: problem formulation, the simplex method, software, and applications. Network models: assignment problems, max-flow problem. Directed graphs: topological sorting, dynamic programming and path problems, and the travelling salesman's problem. General graphs: Eulerian and Hamiltonian paths and circuits, and matchings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 2P72.
MATH 2P92
Introduction to Combinatorics
Counting, inclusion and exclusion, pigeonhole principle, permutations and combinations, derangements, binomial expansions. Introduction to discrete probability and graph theory, Eulerian graphs, Hamilton Cycles, colouring, planarity, and trees.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): two 4U mathematics credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 2P71.
MATH 2P94
Introduction to Network Analysis
Complex networks and their properties, random graphs, network formation models. Webgraph: models, search engines, page-ranking algorithms. Community clustering, community structure. Opinion formation, on-line social networks.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): two 4U mathematics credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 2P77.
MATH 2P95
Mathematics and Music
Scales and temperaments, history of the connections between mathematics and music, set theory in atonal music, group theory applied to composition and analysis, enumeration of rhythmic canons, measurement of melodic similarity using metrics, topics in mathematical music theory, applications of statistics to composition and analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of MATH 1P01, 1P02, 1P05, 1P06, 1P97; MATH 1P11 or 1P12 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 2P97
Problem Solving
Solving mathematical problems using insight and creative thinking. Topics may include pigeonhole principle, finite and countable sets, probability theory, congruences and divisibility, polynomials, generating functions, inequalities, limits, geometry, and mathematical games.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P01 or 1P05; MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH 2P92 (2P71) or MATH/STAT 2P81 or permission of instructor.
Note: recommended to students wishing to participate in mathematical problem solving competitions.
*MATH 2P98
Applied Statistics
(also offered as STAT 2P98)
Single-factor and factorial experimental design methods; nested-factorial experiments. Simple and multiple linear regression methods, correlation analysis, indicator regression; regression model building and transformations. Contingency tables, binomial tests, nonparametric rank tests. Simple random and stratified sampling techniques, estimation of sample size and related topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 1F92 or 1P98.
Note: major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors.
MATH 3P03
Real Analysis
Approximation of functions by algebraic and trigonometric polynomials (Taylor and Fourier series); Weierstrass approximation theorem; Riemann integral of functions on Rn, the Riemann-Stieltjes integral on R; improper integrals; Fourier transforms.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P04.
MATH 3P04
Complex Analysis
Algebra and geometry of complex numbers, complex functions and their derivatives; analytic functions; harmonic functions; complex exponential and trigonometric functions and their inverses; contour integration; Cauchy's theorem and its consequences; Taylor and Laurent series; residues.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03.
MATH 3P06
Vector Calculus and Differential Geometry
Vector fields, vector algebra, vector calculus; gradient, curl and divergence. Polar, cylindrical and spherical coordinates. Green's, Stokes' and divergence theorems. Introduction to differential geometry of surfaces. Topics may include differential forms, exterior calculus, frames, Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03.
MATH 3P08
Advanced Differential Equations
Linear second-order differential equations and special functions. Introduction to Sturm-Liouville theory and series expansions by orthogonal functions. Boundary value problems for the heat equation, wave equation and Laplace equation. Green's functions. Emphasis on applications to physical sciences. Use of Maple.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P08.
MATH 3P09
Partial Differential Equations
Survey of linear and nonlinear partial differential equations. Analytical solution methods. Existence and uniqueness theorems, variational principles, symmetries, and conservation laws. Emphasis on applications to physical sciences. Use of Maple.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P08.
MATH 3P12
Applied Algebra
Group theory with applications. Topics include modular arithmetic, symmetry groups and the dihedral groups, subgroups, cyclic groups, permutation groups, group isomorphism, Burnside's theorem, cosets and Lagrange's theorem, direct products and cryptography, normal subgroups and factor groups.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P12 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 3P13
Abstract Algebra
Further topics in group theory: homomorphisms and isomorphism theorems, structure of finite abelian groups. Rings and ideals; polynomial rings; quotient rings. Division rings and fields; field extensions; finite fields; constructability.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 3P12.
MATH 3P23
Great Moments in Mathematics I
Triumphs in mathematical thinking emphasizing many cultures up to 1000 AD. Analytical understanding of mathematical problems from the past, referencing the stories and times behind the people who solved them. Matching wits with great mathematicians by solving problems and developing activities related to their discoveries.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one MATH or STAT credit.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 2P93.
MATH 3P40
Mathematics Integrated with Computers and Applications III
Concepts and programming of contemporary models and simulations used in mathematics and sciences.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH 2P03 and COSC 2P95.
Note: students will develop a final project in their own discipline.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 2F40.
MATH 3P41
Visual and Interactive Mathematics
Techniques in the visual representation of mathematical data and the interactive presentation of mathematical ideas. Topics may include modelling and simulation, visualization of real world data, interactive learning environments, and interactive websites.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02 or 1P06; MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH 2P40 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 2F40.
MATH 3P51
Applied Mathematics with Maple
Blending mathematical concepts with computations and visualization in Maple. Modelling of physical flows, waves and vibrations. Animation of the heat equation and wave equation; applications including vibrations of rectangular and circular drums, heat flow and diffusion, sound waves. Eigenfunctions and convergence theorems for Fourier eigenfunction series. Approximations, Gibbs phenomena, and asymptotic error analysis using Maple.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03 and 2P12; MATH 2P08 or 2P40.
MATH 3P52
Partial Differential Equations in C++
Analytic solution of first order PDEs (characteristic ODE systems and their analytic solution) and the numerical solution of first and second order PDEs (discretization, derivation and comparison of different finite difference equations, stability analysis, boundary conditions), the syntax of the C++ programming language, projects in C++ solving PDEs numerically.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03 and 2P12; MATH 2P08 or 2P40.
MATH 3P60
Numerical Methods
Survey of computational methods and algorithms; basic concepts (algorithm, computational cost, convergence, stability); roots of functions; linear systems; numerical integration and differentiation; Runge-Kutta method for ordinary differential equations; finite-difference method for partial differential equations; fast Fourier transform; Monte Carlo methods. Implementation of numerical algorithms in a scientific programming language.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02 or 1P06; MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH 2P12 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 3P72
Continuous Optimization
Problems and methods in non-linear optimization. Classical optimization in Rn: inequality constraints, Lagrangian, duality, convexity. Non-linear programming. Search methods for unconstrained optimization. Gradient methods for unconstrained optimization. Constrained optimization. Dynamic programming.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03 or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 3P73
Game Theory
(also offered as ECON 3P73)
Representation of Games. Strategies and payoff functions. Static and dynamic games of complete or incomplete information. Equilibria concepts: Nash, Bayesian Nash and Perfect Bayesian Nash equilibria. Convexity concepts, fixed points for correspondences and minimax. Core and Shapley value of a game. Refinements and Applications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of MATH 2P91 (2P72), ECON 3P91 or 3Q91.
MATH 3P75
Theory of Financial Mathematics
Mathematical models arising in modern investment practices. Compound interest, annuities, the time-value of money, Markowitz portfolio theory, efficient frontier, random walks, Brownian processes, future contracts, European and American options, and put-call parity. Introduction to Black-Scholes.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 2P82.
*MATH 3P81
Experimental Design
(also offered as STAT 3P81)
Analysis of variance; single-factor experiments; randomized block designs; Latin squares designs; factorial designs; 2f and 3f factorial experiments; fixed, random and mixed models; nested and nested-factorial experiments; Taguchi experiments; split-plot and confounded in blocks factorial designs; factorial replication; regression models; computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages; related topics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 2P82.
*MATH 3P82
Regression Analysis
(also offered as STAT 3P82)
Simple and multiple linear regression and correlation, measures of model adequacy, residual analysis, weighted least squares, polynomial regression, indicator variables, variable selection and model building, multicollinearity, time series, additional topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH/STAT 2P82 or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 3P85
Mathematical Statistics II
(also offered as STAT 3P85)
Multivariate, marginal and conditional distributions, independence, expectation, covariance, conditional expectation. Functions of random variables, transformation techniques, order statistics. Special and limiting distributions. Proof of central limit theorem. Point estimation: efficiency, consistency, law of large numbers, sufficiency, Rao-Blackwell theorem MVUE. Interval estimation. Hypothesis testing: Neyman-Pearson theory, likelihood ratio test, Bayesian inference.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03 and MATH/STAT 2P82 or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 3P86
Applied Multivariate Statistics
(also offered as STAT 3P86)
Matrix algebra and random vector, sample geometry and random sampling, multivariate normal distribution, inference about mean, comparison of several multivariate means, multivariate linear regression model, principle components, factor analysis, covariance analysis, canonical correlation analysis, discrimination and classification, cluster analysis, computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages and related topics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH/STAT 2P82 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 3P91
Mathematics at the Junior/Intermediate/Senior Level
A treatment of mathematics and its teaching and learning at the junior, intermediate and senior levels. A major portion of the course will involve directed projects.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MATH (Honours) BSc/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors, Elementary and Secondary Teaching Mathematics minors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): three MATH credits.
Note: Mathematics Integrated with Computers and Applications with a Concentration in Mathematics Education may register. Contact Department. Students in other programs will require permission of the Department.
MATH 3P94
Symmetry Groups, Matrix Representations and Applications
Symmetry groups, their invariants and matrix representations. Permutation groups, rotation groups. Representations of discrete and continuous groups by linear transformations (matrices). General properties and constructions of group representations. Representations of specific groups. Lie groups and Lie algebras. Applications in various areas of Mathematics and Theoretical Physics.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P12 or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 3P95
Introduction to Mathematical Physics
(also offered as PHYS 3P95)
Topics may include Calculus of variations, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics, field theory, differential forms, vector and polyvector fields, tensor fields, Lie derivative, connection, Riemannian metric, Lie groups and algebras, manifolds, and mathematical ideas of quantum mechanics. Applications to theoretical physics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03 and 2P08.
Note: MATH 2P12 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH (PHYS) 4P64.
MATH 3P96
Computational Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems
Orbits of maps, counting and invariant measures, shift transformation, ergodicity and Birkhoff ergodic theorem, central limit theorem for dynamical systems, Poincare recurrence theorem, entropy and data compression, Lyapunov exponent, invariant subspaces, construction of stable and unstable manifolds for maps, symbolic dynamics and topological entropy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03, 2P12 and MATH/STAT 2P81.
MATH 3P97
Introductory Topology
Introduction to metric and topological spaces; connectedness, completeness, countability axioms, separation properties, covering properties, metrization of topological spaces.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P04; MATH 2P12 and 2P13 or MATH 3P12 and 3P13.
MATH 3P98
Functional Analysis
Introduction to the theory of normed linear spaces, fixed-point theorems, Stone-Weierstrass approximation on metric spaces and preliminary applications on sequence spaces.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 3P97.
MATH 4F90
Honours Project
Independent project in an area of pure or applied mathematics, or mathematics education.
Restriction: open to MATH (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average or approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the instructor.
Note: carried out under the supervision of a faculty member. The supervisor must approve the topic in advance. Presentation of the project is required.
MATH 4P03
Advanced Real Analysis
Lebesgue integration on Rn; differentiation and absolute continuity; Fubini's theorem; Lp spaces, elementary theory of Banach and Hilbert spaces.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 3P03.
MATH 4P06
Special Topics
Advanced topics selected from ring theory, homological algebra, algebraic geometry, number theory, point-set topology, differential geometry, algebraic topology, ordinary or partial differential equations, dynamical systems or any other field of mathematics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
*MATH 4P09
Solitons and Nonlinear Wave Equations
(also offered as PHYS 4P09)
Linear and nonlinear travelling waves. Nonlinear evolution equations (Korteweg de Vries, nonlinear Schrodinger, sine-Gordon). Soliton solutions and their interaction properties. Lax pairs, inverse scattering, zero-curvature equations and Backlund transformations, Hamiltonian structures, and conservation laws.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of MATH 3P08, 3P09, 3P51, 3P52.
MATH 4P11
Topics in Groups
Advanced topics from group theory. Topics may include isomorphism theorems, Sylow theorems, finite abelian groups, free groups, nilpotent and solvable groups and some simple Lie groups.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 3P12.
MATH 4P13
Topics in Rings and Modules
Advanced topics from ring theory. Topics may include radicals, Wedderburn-Artin theorems, modules over rings and some special rings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 3P13.
MATH 4P23
Great Moments in Mathematics II
Development of modern mathematics from medieval times to the present. Fibonacci's calculation revolution, the disputes over cubic equations, Pascal and probability, Fermat's last theorem, Newton and Calculus, Euler and infinite series, set theory and the possibilities of inconsistencies in mathematics.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02 or 1P06; MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH 3P23 (2P93).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 3P93.
#MATH 4P61
Theory of Computation
(also offered as COSC 4P61)
Regular languages and finite state machines: deterministic and non-deterministic machines, Kleene's theorem, the pumping lemma, Myhill-Nerode Theorem and decidable questions. Context-free languages: generation by context-free grammars and acceptance by pushdown automata, pumping lemma, closure properties, decidability. Turing machines: recursively enumerable languages, universal Turing machines, halting problem and other undecidable questions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to COSC (single or combined), BCB, CAST, CNET, GAMP and NEUR Neurocomputing stream majors.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P67 (minimum 60 percent).
Note: MATH students may take this course with permission of Mathematics Department.
MATH 4P71
Combinatorics
Review of basic enumeration including distribution problems, inclusion-exclusion and generating functions. Polya theory. Finite fields. Orthogonal Latin squares, affine and projective planes. Coding theory and cryptography.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P92 (2P71) or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 4P81
Sampling Theory
(also offered as STAT 4P81)
Theory of finite population sampling; simple random sampling; sampling proportion; estimation of sample size; stratified random sampling; optimal allocation of sample sizes; ratio estimators; regression estimators; systematic and cluster sampling; multi-stage sampling; errors in surveys; computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages and related topics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 4P82
Nonparametric Statistics
(also offered as STAT 4P82)
Order statistics, rank statistics, methods based on binomial distribution, contingency tables, Kolmogorov Smirnov statistics, nonparametric analysis of variance, nonparametric regression, comparisons with parametric methods. Computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 4P84
Topics in Stochastic Processes and Models
(also offered as STAT 4P84)
Topics may include general stochastic processes, Markov chains and processes, renewal process, branching theory, stationary processes, stochastic models, Monte Carlo simulations and related topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
*MATH 4P85
Topics in Advanced Statistics
(also offered as STAT 4P85)
Topics may include advanced topics in stochastic processes and models, queueing theory, time series analysis, multivariate analysis, Bayesian statistics, advanced methods and theory in statistical inference, and related topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 4P90
Euclidean and Non Euclidean Geometry II
Topics in Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry chosen from the classification of isometries in selected geometries, projective geometry, spherical geometry, finite geometries and axiomatic systems for plane Euclidean geometry.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH 2P90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 3P90.
MATH 4P92
Topics in Number Theory and Cryptography
Topics may include algebraic number theory, analytic number theory and cryptography.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12; one of MATH 2P12, 2P81, 2P92 (2P71), 3P12.
*MATH 4P94
Relativity Theory and Black Holes
(also offered as PHYS 4P94)
Review of Special Relativity and Minkowski space-time. Introduction to General Relativity theory; the space-time metric, geodesics, light cones, horizons, asymptotic flatness; energy-momentum of particles and light rays. Curvature and field equations. Static black holes (Schwarzschild metric), properties of light rays and particle orbits. Rotating black holes (Kerr metric).
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03, 2P08, 3P06, PHYS 2P20 and 2P50 or permission of the instructor.
MATH 4P96
Technology and Mathematics Education
Topics may include contemporary research concerning digital technologies, such as computer algebra systems and Web 2.0, in learning and teaching mathematics, design of educational tools using VB.NET, HTML, Geometer's Sketchpad, Maple, Flash, critical appraisal of interactive learning objects in mathematics education.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 2 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P40 and two and one-half MATH or STAT credits or permission of the instructor.
STATISTICS COURSES
*STAT 1F92
Introductory Statistics
(also offered as MATH 1F92)
Description and comparison of data sets, linear regression analysis, basic probability theory, discrete probability distributions, binomial and normal distributions, Central Limit Theorem, confidence intervals and hypothesis tests on means and proportions, properties of t-, F- and chi-squared distributions, analysis of variance, inference on regression. Emphasis on interpretation of numerical results for all topics. Use of Minitab.
3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one grade 11 mathematics credit.
Note: designed for non-science majors. Concurrent enrolment in MATH/STAT 1P98 or in MATH/STAT 1P99 is not permitted and credits will not be counted. Major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH/STAT 1P98 and 1P99.
#STAT 1P98
Practical Statistics
(also offered as MATH 1P98)
Descriptive statistics; probability of events; counting rules; discrete and continuous probability distributions: binomial, Poisson and normal distributions; Central Limit Theorem; confidence intervals and hypothesis testing; analysis of variance; contingency tables; correlation and regression; emphasis on real-world applications throughout; use of statistical computer software.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to Mathematics (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one grade 12 mathematics course or MATH 1P20.
Note: designed for students in Biological Sciences, Biotechnology, Business, Earth Sciences, Economics, Environmental Geoscience and Medical Sciences. Concurrent enrolment in MATH/STAT 1P99 or in MATH/STAT 1F92 is not permitted and credit will not be counted. Major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH/STAT 1P99 and MATH/STAT 1F92.
#STAT 1P99
Applied Statistics for Life Sciences
(also offered as MATH 1P99)
Visualization and interpretation of life science data using histograms, frequency tables, correlation and regression, and a variety of statistical measures; basic concepts of probability; applications of the binomial, Poisson and normal distributions; confidence intervals for proportions and means; hypothesis testing; contingency tables; introduction to ANOVA; emphasis on interpretation and use of Microsoft Excel software throughout.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: designed for students in the Life and Applied Health Sciences. Concurrent enrolment in MATH/STAT 1P98 or in MATH/STAT 1F92 is not permitted and credit will not be counted.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH/STAT 1P98 and 1F92.
#STAT 2P81
Probability
(also offered as MATH 2P81)
Probability, events, algebra of sets, independence, conditional probability, Bayes' theorem; random variables and their univariate, multivariate, marginal and conditional distributions. Expected value of a random variable, the mean, variance and higher moments, moment generating function, Chebyshev's theorem. Common discrete and continuous distributions: Binomial, Poisson, hypergeometric, normal, uniform and exponential. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P02, 1P06 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be taken concurrently with MATH 2P03.
#STAT 2P82
Mathematical Statistics I
(also offered as MATH 2P82)
Random sampling, descriptive statistics, Central Limit Theorem, sampling distributions related to normality; point estimation: measurements for estimation performance, methods of moments, maximum likelihood, ordinary/weighted least squares; confidence intervals, testing procedures, and their relation for population means, difference between means, variances, ratio of variances, proportions and difference between proportions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 2P81.
#STAT 2P98
Applied Statistics
(also offered as MATH 2P98)
Single-factor and factorial experimental design methods; nested-factorial experiments. Simple and multiple linear regression methods, correlation analysis, indicator regression; regression model building and transformations. Contingency tables, binomial tests, nonparametric rank tests. Simple random and stratified sampling techniques, estimation of sample size and related topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 1F92 or 1P98.
Note: major credit will not be granted to Mathematics majors.
#STAT 3P81
Experimental Design
(also offered as MATH 3P81)
Analysis of variance; single-factor experiments; randomized block designs; Latin squares designs; factorial designs; 2f and 3f factorial experiments; fixed, random and mixed models; nested and nested-factorial experiments; Taguchi experiments; split-plot and confounded in blocks factorial designs; factorial replication; regression models; computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages; related topics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 2P82.
#STAT 3P82
Regression Analysis
(also offered as MATH 3P82)
Simple and multiple linear regression and correlation, measures of model adequacy, residual analysis, weighted least squares, polynomial regression, indicator variables, variable selection and model building, multicollinearity, time series, additional topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH/STAT 2P82 or permission of the instructor.
#STAT 3P85
Mathematical Statistics II
(also offered as MATH 3P85)
Multivariate, marginal and conditional distributions, independence, expectation, covariance, conditional expectation. Functions of random variables, transformation techniques, order statistics. Special and limiting distributions. Proof of central limit theorem. Point estimation: efficiency, consistency, law of large numbers, sufficiency, Rao-Blackwell theorem MVUE. Interval estimation. Hypothesis testing: Neyman-Pearson theory, likelihood ratio test, Bayesian inference.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03 and MATH/STAT 2P82 or permission of the instructor.
#STAT 3P86
Applied Multivariate Statistics
(also offered as MATH 3P86)
Matrix algebra and random vector, sample geometry and random sampling, multivariate normal distribution, inference about mean, comparison of several multivariate means, multivariate linear regression model, principle components, factor analysis, covariance analysis, canonical correlation analysis, discrimination and classification, cluster analysis, computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages and related topics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 1P11 or 1P12; MATH/STAT 2P82 or permission of the instructor.
STAT 4F90
Honours Project
Independent project in an area of pure or applied mathematics,or mathematics education.
Restriction: open to MATH (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average or approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the instructor.
Note: carried out under the supervision of a faculty member. The supervisor must approve the topic in advance. Presentation of the project is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MATH 4F90.
#STAT 4P81
Sampling Theory
(also offered as MATH 4P81)
Theory of finite population sampling; simple random sampling; sampling proportion; estimation of sample size; stratified random sampling; optimal allocation of sample sizes; ratio estimators; regression estimators; systematic and cluster sampling; multi-stage sampling; errors in surveys; computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages and related topics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
#STAT 4P82
Nonparametric Statistics
(also offered as MATH 4P82)
Order statistics, rank statistics, methods based on binomial distribution, contingency tables, Kolmogorov Smirnov statistics, nonparametric analysis of variance, nonparametric regression, comparisons with parametric methods. Computational techniques and use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
#STAT 4P84
Topics in Stochastic Processes and Models
(also offered as MATH 4P84)
Topics may include general stochastic processes, Markov chains and processes, renewal process, branching theory, stationary processes, stochastic models, Monte Carlo simulations and related topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
#STAT 4P85
Topics in Advanced Statistics
(also offered as MATH 4P85)
Topics may include advanced topics in stochastic processes and models, queueing theory, time series analysis, multivariate analysis, Bayesian statistics, advanced methods and theory in statistical inference, and related topics. Use of SAS, Maple or other statistical packages.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH/STAT 3P85 or permission of the instructor.
CO-OP COURSES
MATH 0N01
Co-op Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
MATH 0N02
Co-op Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
MATH 0N03
Co-op Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
MATH 0N04
Co-op Work Placement IV
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
MATH 0N05
Co-op Work Placement V
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
MATH 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): MATH 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
MATH 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): MATH 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
MATH 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): MATH 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
MATH 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): MATH 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
MATH 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provides students with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to MATH and MICA Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): MATH 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Chair
Stephen Anco
Professors Emeriti
Howard E. Bell, Mei Ling Huang, Ronald A. Kerman, Charles F. Laywine, Eric Muller
Professors
S. Ejaz Ahmed, Stephen Anco, Hichem Ben-El-Mechaiekh, Henryk Fuk, Omar Kihel, Yuanlin Li, Alexander Odesskii, Jan Vrbik, Thomas Wolf, Chantal Buteau, Xiaojian Xu
Assistant Professors
Tianyu Guan, William Marshall, Basil Nanayakkara, Pouria Ramazi
Adjunct Professors
Thomas A. Jenkyns, Peng Zhang
Instructor/Manager of Academic Support
Dorothy Levay
Director, Co-op, Career and Experiential Education
Cara Krezek
Mathematics Development Programs Co-ordinator
Neil Marshall
Online Course Developer/Administrator
Mark Willoughby

60

Medical Sciences

61

Medieval and Renaissance Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
MARS 1F90
Medieval and Renaissance Civilizations
Key themes, problems and topics in Medieval and Renaissance civilizations, including: the development of concepts of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance; notions of decline, renewal, rebirth and reformation in the West; sources and methods of inquiry.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: includes an on-line seminar component.
#MARS 2P08
Colonial Latin America
(also offered as HIST 2P08)
Introduction to the history of Latin America from pre-Hispanic times through 1810 focusing on the clashes, alliances and negotiations among indigenous peoples, conquistadores, slaves and missionaries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#MARS 2P70
The Middle East, 600 - 1800
(also offered as HIST 2P70)
Major themes in Middle Eastern history from the advent of Islam to 1800 AD art, culture, religions, migration, minorities, slavery and political developments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#MARS 2P75
Heaven and Earth
(also offered as HIST 2P75)
History of science from ancient Greece through Arabic, European Medieval and Renaissance science into the Early Modern period.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: no background in science is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P75.
*MARS 2P87
Genealogy and Identity in Medieval and Early Modern Spain
(also offered as SPAN 2P87)
Significance of genealogy and blood (i.e. limpieza de sangre or blood purity statues), in the shaping of categories and forms of identification pertaining to Jewish, Muslim and Christian populations, and emerging New Christian groups like Conversos and Moriscos.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*MARS 2P89
Medieval Art, Architecture and Society
(also offered as VISA 2P89)
Interdisciplinary study of the inter-relation and connectedness between the arts, architecture and society in medieval Europe.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#MARS 2P91
Europe's Reformations, 1450-1650
(also offered as HIST 2P91)
Origins, course and consequences of the division of Western Christendom into Protestant and Catholic factions in the 16th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#MARS 2P92
Early to High Renaissance Art and Architecture
(also offered as ITAL 2P92 and VISA 2P92)
Major monuments, buildings and art works of the period from several critical perspectives including the humanist influence on the arts in Florence and Rome, the issue of patronage and the question of the artist's cultural status.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of MARS 1F90, ITAL 1F90, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
MARS 2P93
Medieval Cultures and Literatures
Societies, cultures and literatures of medieval Europe focusing on the High and Late Middle Ages. Sampling of medieval texts ranging from comic and tragic, to religious and epic. Importance of music and its relation to religion, art and literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*MARS 2P95
Reading the Middle Ages: the Heroic and the Chivalric
(also offered as ENGL 2P95)
Heroic and chivalric worlds of Europe and how they shaped medieval society. Selections from Beowulf, Anglo-Saxon heroic literature, Old Norse sagas, the lais of Marie de France, Courtly Love and Arthurian-related narratives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*MARS 2P99
Medieval and Renaissance Tales
(also offered as ITAL 2P99)
Evolution and development of Novella Collections in Europe, emphasizing the Frame Tale function. Selections from Boccaccio, Chaucer, Marguerite de Navarre, Miguel de Cervantes, Maria de Zayas.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#MARS 3F50
Reading the Italian Medieval and Renaissance City
(also offered as HIST 3F50, ITAL 3F50 and VISA 3F50)
Exploring key monuments, churches, museums and urban sites. Concept of the city as expressed through art, literature and architecture from Medieval to Baroque times. Historical and geographical influences and factors in shaping the city, its culture and traditions. Cities include Rome, Assisi, Florence and Siena.
Prerequisite(s): one MARS, HIST, ITAL or VISA credit or permission of the Italian Studies course co-ordinator.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian is needed. Begins in May on campus during the Spring session. Departure for Italy at the end of May-beginning of June for a 2-week study tour of Rome, Assisi, Florence and Siena. Students are responsible for travel, accommodation and other expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ITAL (VISA) 2F99 and MARS (ITAL/VISA) 3M50.
#MARS 3P09
The Later Roman Empire
(also offered as CLAS 3P09 and ITAL 3P09)
History of the Roman Empire from the death of Marcus Aurelius to late Antiquity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CLAS 1P92, 2P97, 3P23
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CLAS 4P55, ITAL 4P55 and MARS 4P55.
#MARS 3P19
The Rise of Christian Philosophy
(also offered as PHIL 3P19)
Philosophy from the patristic period through Erigena and Anselm up to and including the 12th-century Renaissance.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
#MARS 3P30
The Viking Age
(also offered as HIST 3P30)
Follows the Vikings from their Scandinavian homelands as they raid, trade and settle throughout Europe and the North Atlantic, convert to Christianity, establish new kingdoms and eventually assimilate into medieval Christendom.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date, open to MARS, HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#MARS 3P92
Petrarch and Boccaccio
(also offered as ITAL 3P92)
Literature, arts and culture of the Middle Ages, emphasizing Petrarch's Canzoniere (Song Book) and Boccaccio's Decameron, and the works and genres that they influenced.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one MARS credit, one ITAL credit or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian is required.
#MARS 3P93
Dante's Inferno
(also offered as ITAL 3P93)
Dante's Divine Comedy and the world it created and reflected, focusing on the Inferno. References to relevant visual arts (illustrations and adaptations of the Divine Comedy by such artists as Dor, Rodin and the Pre-Raphaelites).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian is required.
*MARS 3P96
Medieval and Early Modern Christianity 
(also offered as HIST 3P96)
Interdisciplinary study of the continuities and discontinuities in the history of the Christian Church from the onset of the Middle Ages to the eve of the Protestant reformations. Examination of ecclesiastical authority, Christianity's interactions with Judaism and Islam, changing social structures, monastic reforms, the Crusades, magic, science, religion, the papacy, and the cult of saints and devotion to relics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*MARS 3P97
The World of the Renaissance and Beyond
(also offered as HIST 3P97)
Interdisciplinary study of the primary texts relative to the European Renaissance and global questions that reshape the world, emphasizing the historical, cultural and intellectual legacies of the Renaissance, including literature, religion, philosophy, science, medicine and the history of exploration.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
MARS 3Q63
Africans in the Early Modern Iberian Atlantic
Experiences and narratives of Africans in the South Atlantic, linking Iberia, West Africa and the Americas (1400-1700).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#MARS 3Q91
Renaissance Perceptions of Indigenous Cultures
(also offered as HIST 3Q91 and SPAN 3Q91)
Perceptions and views of indigenous American peoples and civilizations in Renaissance Europe, drawing from written accounts, histories of the Indies, and visual representations of Incas, Aztecs and Mayans.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one MARS, HIST, SPAN credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
*MARS 3Q92
Moors, New Christians and Renegades
(also offered as HIST 3Q92 and SPAN 3Q92)
Contesting identity categories resulting from exchanges and interactions of Christians and Muslims in the early modern Mediterranean world, through the study of historical and fictional primary sources.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one MARS, HIST or SPAN credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
#MARS 3Q96
The Vikings and the Historians
(also offered as HIST 3Q96)
Select problems and debates in Viking studies and the medieval evidence on which they are based.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.  After that date, open to HIST (single or combined), HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), MARS (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 1 (alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 and one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: HIST 3P30 is strongly recommended.
MARS 4P00
Directed Studies
Program of study designed in consultation with a faculty member.
Restriction: open to MARS majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: Application form including a research proposal must be submitted by March 31 before entering year 4.
*MARS 4P01
Sources and Methods of Medieval and Renaissance Studies
(also offered as ENGL 4P01 and HIST 4P01)
Exploration of ways of working with a range of source materials in addressing inquiries into Medieval and Renaissance cultural forms and societies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MARS, ENCW, ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), WRDS (single or combined), HIST (single or combined), and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: students in other disciplines may register with permission of the instructor and Director.
#MARS 4P06
Medieval Literature and Social Control
(also offered as ENGL 4P06)
Medieval English literature in relation to the management of different populations in Britain in the late Middle Ages. Topics include the English Rising of 1381, punishment systems, sexuality, literacies and class, the disciplining of bodies to conform to etiquette, the regulation of female speech, and colonization and civility.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MARS (single or combined), ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MARS (ENGL) 4V06.
#MARS 4P70
Reading a Renaissance Woman
(also offered as ENGL 4P70)
The place of books and reading in the life and culture of Anne Clifford. Readings from personal writings and books in her library including extracts (in English) from Ovid's Metamorphoses, Cervantes' Don Quixote, Castiglione's Courtier, Montaigne's Essays, Chaucer, Spenser, Jonson and Donne.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MARS, ECUL, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor and the Chair.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MARS (ENGL) 3V92 and 4V70.
MARS 4V70-4V75
Selected Topics in Medieval and Renaissance Studies
Issues in Medieval and Renaissance Studies.
Administrative Assistant
Elaine Aldridge-Low
905-688-5550, extension 5325
Glenridge A, Room 213
The Centre for Medieval and Renaissance Studies offers an excellent opportunity to study medieval and Renaissance culture and society from an interdisciplinary and cross-cultural study of the history, literature, philosophy, art and architecture of cultures across the globe from 400 CE to 1700 CE. To this end, we have participating faculty from Digital Humanities, English Language and Literature, History, Modern Languages, Literature and Cultures, Music, Visual Arts, Philosophy, and Classics.
The Centre for Medieval and Renaissance Studies offers a combined major program leading to a BA (Honours) and Minor for students in other disciplines. Medieval and Renaissance Studies can be combined with any other program offering a combined major option. Medieval and Renaissance Studies core courses may also be taken as electives by students in other disciplines.
Course offerings range from the late Roman world to Renaissance Italy, from Byzantium to Iceland, and from the reading of seminal authors like Dante, Chaucer and Shakespeare among many others. As well, our courses explore the culture, religion, music, architecture and art of the Middle Ages and Renaissance.
The Middle Ages and Renaissance were instrumental in shaping the cultures in which we live. The interdisciplinary understanding of how Medieval and Renaissance cultures worked will illustrate their legacy to us, and their importance in shaping who and what we are. Our program seeks to help the students develop the skills of critical inquiry, analysis, argument and expression needed for the treatment of these questions.
The Centre recommends that students have their programs reviewed each year by the Faculty of Humanities Undergraduate Adviser and/or the Director. Students planning to enter fourth year are required to have their programs approved by the Humanities Undergraduate Adviser as well as the Director.
Students considering graduate work in Medieval and/or Renaissance Studies should note that graduate programs normally require competence in Latin and other languages depending on the specific area of study.
Study Abroad
In the Spring session, the Centre for Medieval and Renaissance Studies often offers study abroad courses such as MARS 3F50 Reading the Italian Medieval and Renaissance City. For information contact the Director.

62

Modern Languages, Literatures and Cultures
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ARABIC COURSE
ARAB 1F00
Introductory Classical Arabic
Arabic script; grammatical structures and vocabulary of classical Arabic. Development of the four basic language skills (reading, writing, speaking and listening).
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Note: open to students with no background in the language.
GERMAN COURSES
GERM 1F00
Introductory Language
Development of basic skills in grammatical structures, reading of simple texts, oral comprehension and conversational fluency. Integration of cultural and social aspects. Films, recordings and on-line resources are used.
Lectures, language/computer lab, 4 hours per week.
Note: open to students with no background in the language.
GERM 1F90
Intermediate Language
Introduction of more complex grammar concepts, as well as conversational and written skills using 20th-century literary and media sources including films, recordings and on-line resources.
Lectures, language/computer lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GERM 1F00, Ontario grade 12U German or permission of the instructor.
GERM 1P03
Introductory German for Exchange Students
Development of basic skills in grammatical structures, reading of simple texts, oral comprehension and conversational fluency. Integration of cultural and social aspects. Films, recordings and on-line resources are used.
Lectures, language/computer lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
GERM 1P91
Intermediate German for Exchange Students
Introduction of more complex grammar concepts, as well as conversational and written skills using 20th-century literary and media sources including films, recordings and online resources.
Lectures, language/computer lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Note: additional vocabulary/phrases to better prepare Business student for their academic exchange will be provided.
*GERM 1P93
Culture and Civilization of Central Europe: From the Prehistoric to 350CE
(also offered as CLAS 1P93)
Cultural development of Central Europe from the earliest stone and pottery cultures, through the Bronze, Iron and Celtic Ages, ending with the Gallo-Roman period. Beliefs and practices, material objects, artistic developments, and architecture. Digitized images are used to illustrate the cultural evidence.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Note: given in English.
GERM 2F00
Language, Literature and Culture
Intensive study of current German language usage, modern literature and contemporary culture. Designed to improve communication, comprehension and written skills.
Lectures, language lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GERM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
GERM 2P80
Tutorial I
Study in an area of language or literature of mutual interest to the student and the instructor. Texts for language practice may be drawn from film, literature, or current news sources.
Tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Note: a written proposal must be approved by the Chair.
GERM 2P90
German Cinema
Major film directors and cultural trends in German cinema. Films studied may include those by Herzog, von Trotta, Hirschbiegel, Murnau, Verhoeven, Vilsmaier, von Donnersmarck, Akin and Tykwer.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; plus weekly film lab.
Prerequisite(s): GERM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
GERM 2P92
Language and Literature of the 20th Century
Overview of short narrative texts from pre-World War I to post-World War II. Designed to expand critical reasoning and writing skills, both active and passive vocabularies, and comprehension.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GERM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
GERM 2P95
Language through Film and Literature of the 20th Century
Culture, history and politics of German-speaking regions through short prose texts and contemporary films. Emphasis on oral comprehension, and reading and writing skills as well as on critical reasoning.
Seminar, film lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GERM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
GERM 3F99
Advanced Language Study
Intensive grammar review and introduction to advanced topics; translation; practice in speaking, writing and comprehension through written and oral projects, discussions, recordings, films and on-line resources.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GERM 2F00 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
GERM 3P80
Tutorial II
Advanced study in an area of language or literature of mutual interest to the student and the instructor. Texts for language practice may be drawn from film, literature or current news sources.
Tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Note: a written proposal must be approved by the Chair.
JAPANESE COURSES
JAPA 1F00
Introductory Japanese
Acquisition of language skills, such as writing (Hiragana, Katakana and Kanji), reading, listening and speaking as well as some knowledge of Japanese culture.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Note: open to students with no background in the Japanese language.
JAPA 1F80
Intermediate Japanese
Further development of Japanese grammar, writing, reading and communication skills emphasizing socio-cultural situations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): JAPA 1F00 (1P00 and 1P01) or permission of the instructor.
MANDARIN CHINESE COURSES
MAND 1P00
Mandarin Chinese I
Elementary Mandarin focusing on conversation, listening, basic grammatical structures and understanding of relevant customs. Introduction to Pinyin.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Note: open to students with limited or no background in the language. Not open to native speakers.
MAND 1P01
Mandarin Chinese II
Conversational Mandarin emphasizing vocabulary building, grammatical structures, customs and cultural knowledge. Introduction of Chinese characters.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MAND 1P00 or permission of the instructor.
Note: Not open to native speakers.
MAND 1P80
Mandarin Chinese III
Basic written and oral skills for everyday needs emphasizing practical communication and reading of Chinese characters.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MAND 1P01 or permission of the instructor.
MAND 1P81
Mandarin Chinese IV
Written and oral skills, further development of vocabulary and grammatical structures focusing on writing Chinese characters for practical text development.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MAND 1P80 or permission of the instructor.
MODERN LANGUAGES, LITERATURES AND CULTURE COURSES
MLLC 1F90
Cultures of Western Europe
Emergence of distinct Western European cultures and civilizations from the early modern period to modern times; cultural, political and religious perspectives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SCLC 1F90.
MLLC 2F00
Literatures of Western Europe
Comparative approach to the study of major works and writers from France, Germany, Italy, Portugal and Spain.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC (SCLC) 1F90 or permission of instructor.
MLLC 2P90
Comparative Approach to Literary Criticism
Introduction to literary theory and critical approaches to comparative literature, and application to literary texts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC (SCLC) 1F90 or permission of instructor.
Corequisite(s): MLLC 2F00 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
#MLLC 2P93
Critical Practice in the Fine and Performing Arts
(also offered as CANA 2P93, IASC 2P93 and STAC 2P93)
Interdisciplinary approach to key ideas about music, art, dance and drama through critical readings and guided exposure to selected public fine and performing art events. Exploration of issues in aesthetics and criticism using varied theoretical approaches.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93), IASC 1F01 (1F00), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
Note: event attendance is required; events fees required. May be offered online or blended.
#MLLC 2P94
Embodied Text: Art Beyond the Artifact
(also offered as CANA 2P94, IASC 2P94 and STAC 2P94)
Functions of art and artifacts outside the conventions associated with words, texts, paintings and scores. Experiencing musical, visual, movement, and theatre vocabularies through exploration of spatial/temporal/aesthetic/embodied forms of art in performance.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93), IASC 1F01 (1F00), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
MLLC 2P95
Introduction to Romance Linguistics
Overview of phonetics, phonology, morphology and syntax of Romance languages; linguistics theories, research methodology and current issues in the study of Romance languages.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
MLLC 3P00
Comparative Studies in Literary Genres
Theoretical considerations of literary forms in major works from France, Germany, Italy, Portugal and Spain.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 2F00 and 2P90 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
#MLLC 3P01
Media Transformations in The Creative Arts
(also offered as IASC 3P01, STAC 3P01 and VISA 3P01)
Trajectory and influences of new media on the development of and discourses in 20th Century and contemporary creative production including the arts, broadcast, film, video, and electronic arenas such as the internet, games and interactive media. Overview of fundamental concepts, practices and language. Consideration of aesthetics, production, script and story, direction, authorship, collaborative process and distribution.
Lectures, 3 hours per week online.
Prerequisite(s): two STAC, COMM, ENGL, IASC, VISA, WRDS (WRIT) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or blended.
#MLLC 3P14
Dramatic Creation for Contemporary Cultural Practice
(also offered as DART 3P14, IASC 3P14, STAC 3P14 and VISA 3P14)
Components of dramatic story. Understanding character, dramatic action, structure, direction, improvisation, tempo, rhythm, voice and body potential. Theory and practical application in projects for creators in the arts, media and film.
Seminar, workshop 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two STAC, COMM, DART, IASC, VISA credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment limited to 20 students. Materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. May be offered online or blended.
Students will not receive earned credit for STAC 3P14 if DART 3F50, 3P53 or 3P92 have been successfully completed.
MLLC 3P20
Comparative Studies in Western European Cinema
Aspects of the culture, society and history of Western Europe as depicted in selected films from France, Germany, Italy, Portugal and Spain.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week, plus film lab.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 2F00 and 2P90 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
*MLLC 3P80
Comparative Analysis of Romance Languages
(also offered as LING 3P80)
Grammatical structures of Romance languages from a contrastive perspective.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 2P95 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
MLLC 3P85
Translation Theories
Historical and contemporary perspectives on translation theories and practices. Topics may include the role of the translator, comparative/contrastive analysis, intercultural equivalence and interference, problems in literary and technical translations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 2P90; one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
#MLLC 3P96
Landscape Culture
(also offered as STAC 3P96)
Nature in the arts. Historical practice and contemporary expression in all art forms. Landscape theory, garden history, environmental art, public art and artist's gardens. Hybridization of methodologies: conceptual, horticultural, landscape design and landscape architecture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance is required; events fees required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P99.
#MLLC 3P99
Interpretive and Critical Writing in the Arts
(also offered as STAC 3P99, VISA 3P99 and WRDS 3P99)
Principles and methodologies for the written presentation and representation of works of art, artists' practice and events within general and specific disciplinary contexts, discourses and frameworks. Examples from across the arts; practice based projects from real world events and performances. Orientation to specialized publics in print and other media.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or blended. Event attendance is required; events fees required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P99.
MLLC 3V00-3V09
Special Topics in Comparative Literatures
Course content will vary depending on the research and interests of instructor.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 2F00 and 2P90 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
MLLC 3V80-3V89
Special Topics in Comparative Romance Linguistics
Course content will vary depending on the research and interests of instructor.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 2P95 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
MLLC 4P00
Comparative Studies in Narratives and the Arts
Topics may include orality, testimonial and post-colonial narratives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 3P00; one of MLLC 3V00-3V09; one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
#MLLC 4P01
Creating Social Value from Material Culture
(also offered as IASC 4P01, STAC 4P01 and VISA 4P01)
Theory and practice of creating social value from material culture. Curatorial and interpretive practice in public institutions focusing on art, human and natural history, and science and technology. Informal learning theory, authority structures and community engagement, audience segmentation and selection, exhibit design, and collections development within social and political contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance may be required. Events fees may be required.
MLLC 4P10
Independent Study
Independent research project in comparative studies in literature or linguistics under the supervision of a faculty member.
Restriction: open to SCLN majors.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 3P00; one of MLLC 3V00-3V09; one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90 or permission of instructor.
MLLC 4P11
Major Research Paper
Major project in comparative studies in literature or linguistics on a topic of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: open to SCLC majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 3P00; one of MLLC 3V00-3V09; one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90 or permission of instructor.
#MLLC 4P72
High and Low Art: Intersections, Exchanges and Flows
(also offered as IASC 4P72, STAC 4P72 and VISA 4P72)
Exchange between high art and entertainment, considering intertextuality and cultural appropriation; the changing role of museums and community-based arts; and the migration of values and tastes between market-driven and not-for-profit cultural outcomes.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 12.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance is required; event fees required. May be offered online or blended.
*MLLC 4Q80
Historical Romance Linguistics
(also offered as LING 4Q80)
Factors affecting language change: internal history (sounds and inflection) and external forces (politics and society). Methods and theories applied to the historical study of Romance linguistics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per weeK
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 3P80; one of MLLC 3V80-3V89; one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90 or permission of instructor
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MLLC 4P80.
MLLC 4V00-4V09
Advanced Topics in Comparative Literatures
Course content will vary depending on the research and interests of instructor.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MLLC 3P10; one of MLLC 3V00-3V09; one of FREN 1F90, ITAL 1F90, PORT 1F90, SPAN 1F90 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be counted as part of a major program in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies or Italian Studies.
RUSSIAN COURSE
RUSS 1F00
Introductory Russian
Development of the basic skills in language proficiency (reading, writing, speaking and comprehension).
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
SWAHILI COURSE
SWAH 1F00
Introductory Kiswahili
Fundamental conversation skills and basic grammatical structures of Kiswahili, focusing on the four basic language skills of speaking, listening, reading and writing. Introduction to major aspects of contemporary Kiswahili culture.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: open to students with no background in the language.
Administrative Assistant
Violetta Clitheroe
905-688-5550, extension 3312
Glenridge 573A, Room 263
brocku.ca/modernlanguages
The Department of Modern Languages, Literatures and Cultures offers a variety of courses and degree programs in French Studies, Hispanic and Latin American Studies and Italian Studies. The Department also offers language courses in Arabic, Japanese, Mandarin, Russian and Swahili.
The Department of Modern Languages, Literatures and Cultures offers four-year programs of study leading to a BA Honours in French Studies, as well as a combined honours in Hispanic and Latin American Studies, and Italian Studies, three-year BA Pass degree program in French Studies, as well as a combined pass in Hispanic and Latin American Studies, a concurrent five-year BA(Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) degree in French Studies and a Certificate in Spanish Language Proficiency. In addition the Department offers Minor programs in French Studies, German, Hispanic and Latin American Studies and Italian Studies.

63

Music
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
MUSIC COURSES
MUSI 1F10
Introduction to Classical Music
Role of music in Western cultural and intellectual history. Discussion of specific works in Western art music. Development of critical listening and writing skills.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: major credit will not be granted to Music majors. Will be taught on main campus. Concert fee. Attendance at designated concerts is required. May be offered online.
MUSI 1F81
Applied Lessons I
Individual instruction in one of the following: piano, organ, voice, classical guitar or any approved concert band and orchestral instrument.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department. See Entrance Requirements for Music Majors.
Note: basic performance skills and solo audition required. Lesson fee. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F92 (1F91).
MUSI 1F92
Applied Music I
Individual instruction in one of the following: piano, organ, voice, classical guitar or any approved concert band and orchestral instrument.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: permission of the Department. See Entrance Requirements for Bachelor of Music Majors.
Note: Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F81 and 1F91.
*MUSI 1P00
Music in Popular Culture I
(also offered as PCUL 1P00)
Survey of developments in the music industry and styles of blues, country, jazz, and rock up to the 1960s.
Weekly online modules; listening assignments.
Note: major credit will not be granted to Music majors. Online. Concert fee may be required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F00.
*MUSI 1P01
Music in Popular Culture II
(also offered as PCUL 1P01)
Survey of developments in rock, jazz, pop, and related musical styles from the 1960s to the present.
Weekly online modules; listening assignments.
Note: major credit will not be granted to Music majors. Online. Concert fee may be required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F00.
MUSI 1P20
Materials of Music I
Introduction to music-theoretical concepts: keys, intervals, chords, rhythm, terms and signs, and elementary harmony, counterpoint and analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): completion of Departmental placement evaluation in music theory.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F90.
MUSI 1P50
Music in Global Culture I
How music influences and reflects its culture and society. Issues of musical style from historical and cross-cultural perspectives. Music research writing skills. Relevant digital applications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F50.
MUSI 1P55
Music in Global Culture II
Meaning and function of music in selected societies and cultures from around the world. Further development of research writing skills and use of digital resources.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F50.
MUSI 1P78
Jazz Ensemble I
Selected jazz arrangements in rehearsal and performance. Development of chart reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; performance as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Note: previous ensemble experience recommended. Instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 1P80
Lessons and Ensemble
Individual instruction in one of: piano, organ, voice, classical guitar or any approved concert band and orchestral instrument. Participation in any one of: 1P78, 1P84, 1P86, 1P87, 1P88, 1P89.
Private instruction, 0.5 hour per week for one term; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for one term; rehearsals, 3 hours per week for one term; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department; audition required.
Note: Lesson fee is required. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required. Concert fee may be required. Available winter term only.
MUSI 1P82
Applied Studio I
Individual instruction in one of the following: piano, organ, voice, classical guitar or any approved concert band and orchestral instrument.
Private instruction, 0.5 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department. See Entrance Requirements for Music Majors.
Note: basic performance skills and solo audition required. Lesson fee. Concert fee; consult the Department. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1P81.
MUSI 1P84
Wind Ensemble I
Selected wind literature in rehearsal and performance. Development of sight-reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in dress rehearsals and concert performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Note: previous ensemble experience required. Instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 1P86
String Orchestra I
Selected orchestral literature in rehearsal and performance. Development of sight-reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Note: previous ensemble experience recommended. Instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 1P87
Male Voice Choir I
Selected choral literature for male voices in rehearsal and performance. Development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Note: pitch-matching skills required; basic sight-singing skills strongly recommended. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required. Non-majors are encouraged to audition.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1Y87.
MUSI 1P88
Female Voice Choir I
Selected choral literature for female voices in rehearsal and performance. Development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Note: pitch-matching skills required; basic sight-singing skills strongly recommended. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required. Non-majors are encouraged to audition.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1Y88.
MUSI 1P89
Mixed Voice Choir I
Selected choral literature for mixed voices in rehearsal and performance. Development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Note: pitch-matching skills required; basic sight-singing skills strongly recommended. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required. Non-majors are encouraged to audition.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1Y89.
MUSI 1P90
Materials of Music II
Continuation of theoretical concepts begun in MUSI 1P20: four-part harmony, two-part species counterpoint and analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P20.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 1F90.
#MUSI 1P99
The Culture of Noise
(also offered as IASC 1P99, STAC 1P99 and VISA 1P99)
Role of noise in music, social space and art. Exploration of discursive issues concerning the value of sound studies.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours.
Note: Offered online.
MUSI 1Y04
Music Theory Rudiments
Rhythm notation, pitch notation, scales, intervals, chords, terms and signs.
Online lectures, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department (theory placement test) required; consult the Department
Note: completion of online assignments and online final exam required. Major credit will not be granted to Music majors. Course credit on a pass/fail basis.
MUSI 2F81
Applied Lessons II
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1F81, 1F92 (1F91), 1P82 (1P81).
Note: lesson fee; consult the Department. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2F92.
MUSI 2F91
Solo Performance I
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study. Preparation and execution of a public recital program under the supervision of the student's principal teacher.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: open to BMus (Performance concentration) majors and permission of the Department; audition required.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1F92 (1F91) (jury minimum 90 percent).
Note: prerequisite may be satisfied with its equivalent by audition. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required. Recital program must be approximately 20 minutes of music.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2F92.
MUSI 2F92
Applied Music II
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: open to BMus majors and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1F92 (1F91) or permission of the Department.
Note: Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2F81, 2F91 and 2P92.
MUSI 2P21
Accompanying I
Supervised experience in keyboard accompaniment, including sight reading, transposition, figured bass and realizations, orchestral reductions, interpretation, rehearsal strategies, performance preparation.
Seminar, 1 hour alternating weeks for two terms; skills classes, supervised rehearsals, performances, minimum 1 hour per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): Royal Conservatory Piano Level 9 or equivalent.
Note: required attendance at rehearsals, lessons and masterclasses in preparation for performances.
MUSI 2P40
Vocal Techniques
Practical and theoretical instruction in vocal technique.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
MUSI 2P41
Woodwind Techniques
Practical and theoretical instruction in woodwind instruments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: instrumental rental fee may be required.
MUSI 2P42
Brass Techniques
Practical and theoretical instruction in brass instruments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: instrumental rental fee may be required.
MUSI 2P43
Percussion Techniques
Practical and theoretical instruction in percussion instruments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: instrumental rental fee may be required.
MUSI 2P44
String Techniques
Practical and theoretical instruction in string instruments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: instrumental rental fee may be required.
MUSI 2P45
Foundations of Music Education
Introduction to philosophy, history, sociology and methodology of music education in various learning contexts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P55 (1F50).
Note: music ensemble experience strongly recommended.
MUSI 2P46
Guitar and Ukulele Techniques
Practical and theoretical instruction in guitar and ukulele.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: instrumental rental fee may be required.
MUSI 2P48
Instrumental Jazz Techniques
Practical and theoretical introduction to chart reading and improvisation in jazz styles on an approved instrument.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): Royal Conservatory Level 7 Theory or equivalent or permission of the instructor.
Note: student must supply own instrument.
MUSI 2P49
Improvisation
Techniques and practice of improvisation for musical performance, music therapy and music education.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1F81, 1F92, 1P82 or permission of the Department.
MUSI 2P50
Music in Western Culture I
Topics in the history of Western art music from the Middle Ages to the end of the 18th century. Analysis of representative musical compositions with assigned readings from secondary literature.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P90 or permission of the instructor.
MUSI 2P55
Music in Western Culture II
Topics in the history of Western art music from the end of the 18th century to the present. Further analysis of representative musical compositions with assigned readings from secondary literature.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P90 or permission of the instructor.
*MUSI 2P63
Theory and Practice of Music Therapy
(also offered as RECL 2P63)
Introduction to the theoretical foundations and major practical techniques of music therapy. Topics from the perspectives of both individual therapists and those working in a multi-disciplinary team.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MUSI (single of combined), MUSC and RECL majors with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of the Department.
Note: may include site visits; field-trip fees may be required.
#MUSI 2P70
Popular Music and Society
(also offered as COMM 2P70, PCUL 2P70 and SOCI 2P70)
Critical approaches to popular music in its social, cultural, political and economic contexts.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MUSI (single and combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to MUSI (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL, SOCI (single or combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students, PCUL and MEST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1F00, 1F50, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, PCUL 1F92, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
MUSI 2P78
Jazz Ensemble II
Selected jazz arrangements in rehearsal and performance. Further development of chart reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P78.
Corequisite(s): MUSI 2P48.
MUSI 2P80
Secondary Studio I
Individual instruction in a second instrument or voice: piano, organ, voice, classical guitar or any approved concert band and orchestral instrument not studied as a first instrument.
Private instruction, 0.5 hours per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1F92 (1F91).
Corequisite(s): MUSI 2F91 or 2F92.
Note: basic performance skills and solo audition required. Lesson fee; consult the Department. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2P81.
MUSI 2P82
Applied Studio II
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 0.5 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1F81, 1F92 (1F91), 1P82 (1P81).
Note: lesson fee; consult the Department. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2P81.
MUSI 2P84
Wind Ensemble II
Selected wind literature in rehearsal and performance. Further development of sight-reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in dress rehearsals and performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P84.
MUSI 2P86
String Orchestra II
Selected orchestral literature in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of sight-reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P86.
Note: previous ensemble experience recommended. Instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 2P87
Male Voice Choir II
Selected choral literature for male voices in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1P87, 1Y87, 1Y89.
Note: basic sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2Y87.
MUSI 2P88
Female Voice Choir II
Selected choral literature for female voices in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1P88, 1Y88, 1Y89.
Note: basic sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2Y88.
MUSI 2P89
Mixed Voice Choir II
Selected choral literature in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1P87, 1P88, 1P89, 1Y87, 1Y88, 1Y89.
Note: basic sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2Y89.
MUSI 2P90
Materials of Music III
Four-part harmony with modulation, counterpoint and analysis. Introduction to composition.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P90.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2F90.
MUSI 2P93
Conducting I
Introduction to historical, theoretical and practical aspects of ensemble conducting. Topics include gesture techniques, music leadership and score analysis.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P90; one of MUSI 1P84, 1P86, 1P88, 1P89
Corequisite(s): one of MUSI 2P84, 2P86, 2P88, 2P89, 3P84, 3P86, 3P88, 3P89, 4P84, 4P86, 4P88, 4P89.
Note: keyboard skills strongly recommended.
MUSI 2P95
Materials of Music IV
Chromatic harmony up to enharmonic modulation, counterpoint, form and analysis, and continuation of composition.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 2F90.
MUSI 2P98
Digital Applications in Music Notation
Use of notation software for score writing and scholarly publication.
Lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P20.
MUSI 2P99
Digital Applications in Music Sequencing
Use of sequencing software for transcription and composition.
Lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P20.
MUSI 2Y05
Aural Skills I
Aural perception of diatonic musical materials, simple and compound meters, rhythm and elementary chromaticism through sight-reading, dictation and recognition exercises.
Lab, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department (aural placement test) required; consult the Department.
MUSI 2Y06
Keyboard Harmony I
Scales, triads and cadences. Introduction to harmonic progressions, figured bass and sight reading skills.
Lab, 1 hour per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): successful completion of Department placement test in theory equivalent to Royal Conservatory Level 7 Theory.
MUSI 3F81
Applied Lessons III
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 2F81, 2F91, 2P82, 2F92 (2P92).
Note: lesson fee; consult the Department. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 3F92.
MUSI 3F91
Solo Performance II
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study. Preparation and execution of a public recital program under the supervision of the student's principal teacher.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: open to BMus (Performance) majors and permission of the Department; audition required.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2F91 (recital minimum 80 percent).
Note: Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required. Recital program must be approximately 45 minutes of music.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 3F92.
MUSI 3F92
Applied Music Ill
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: open to BMus majors and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2F92 or permission of the Department.
Note: Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 3F81 and 3F91.
MUSI 3P00
Digital Applications in Sound Production and Recording
Advanced use of Digital Audio Workstations for full audio production. Recording, editing and mixing techniques, use of recording and studio equipment.
Lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P99 or previous experience with DAW.
MUSI 3P20
Piano Pedagogy
Methodologies for teaching all ages and all levels. Historical treatises and educational materials, current research and practical teaching experiences. Topics include sequencing and reinforcement of technical and musical concepts, critical evaluation of methods, curriculum design, problem solving techniques and communication skills.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): Royal Conservatory Level 8 Piano or equivalent.
MUSI 3P21
Accompanying II
Further supervised experience in keyboard accompaniment, including interpretation, rehearsal strategies, performance preparation.
Seminar, 1 hour alternating weeks for two terms; supervised rehearsals, performances, minimum 1 hour per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P21 (minimum 80 percent).
*MUSI 3P55
Storytelling in the Musical Theatre
(also offered as DART 3P55 and ENGL 3P55)
Comparisons between operas/musicals, their theatrical/literary sources, and cinematic adaptations. Topics include the use of narrators, the orchestra's role, point of view, and the contributions of performers and directors.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): any one of MUSI 1P50, 1P55, DART 1P91, DART 1P92, ENGL 1F91, ENGL 1F95, ENGL 1F97, or permission of the instructor.
Note: no prior musical experience is required.
*MUSI 3P64
Music Cognition
(also offered as PSYC 3P64)
How the human mind/brain processes, responds to and produces music. Topics include perception, memory, emotions, performance, and the developmental and social psychology of music.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P55 (1F50) or PSYC 1F90.
#MUSI 3P73
Popular Music and Youth Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P73, PCUL 3P73 and SOCI 3P73)
Cultural relation between young people and popular music. Topics include music's role in the formation of identity, the connection between musical taste and various forms of youth fashion or style, and the impact of new technologies on the ways in which young people access music.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
MUSI 3P76
Chamber Music Outreach I
Preparation, organization and performance of a live and/or virtual concert for traditional or non-traditional chamber-music group (trio or quartet).
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for one term; performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): any one of MUSI 2F81, 2F91, 2F92, 2P82.
Note: student will assume a greater leadership role than in MUSI 3P76.
MUSI 3P78
Jazz Ensemble III
Selected jazz arrangements in rehearsal and performance. Further development of chart reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P48 and 2P78.
Note: instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 3P80
Secondary Studio II
Continuation of study on a second instrument or voice.
Private instruction, 0.5 hours per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P80.
Corequisite(s): MUSI 3F91 or 3F92.
Note: Lesson fee may be required; consult the Department. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
MUSI 3P82
Applied Studio III
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 0.5 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 2F81, 2F91, 2P82, 2F92 (2P92).
Note: lesson fee may be required; consult the Department. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series is required.
MUSI 3P84
Wind Ensemble III
Selected wind literature in rehearsal and performance. Further development of sight-reading, technical and interpretative skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in dress rehearsals and performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P84.
MUSI 3P86
String Orchestra III
Selected orchestral literature in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of sight-reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P86.
Note: previous ensemble experience recommended. Instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 3P87
Male Voice Choir III
Selected choral literature for male voices in rehearsal and performance.Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 2P87, 2Y87, 2Y89.
Note: intermediate sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 3Y87.
MUSI 3P88
Female Voice Choir III
Selected choral literature for female voices in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 2P88, 2Y88, 2Y89.
Note: intermediate sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 3Y88.
MUSI 3P89
Mixed Voice Choir III
Selected choral literature in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 2P87, 2P88, 2P89, 2Y87, 2Y88, 2Y89.
Note: intermediate sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 3Y89.
MUSI 3P90
Approaches to Music Theory Since 1900
Introduction to Schoenberg's theories of thematic development, Schenkerian voice leading analysis, twelve-tone and elementary set theory, theories of rhythm and form.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P55 (1F50) and 2P95 (2F90).
*MUSI 3P91
History of Music in Canada
(also offered as CANA 3P91)
Canadian music and its place in our culture from the earliest European influences to the works of modern Canadian composers, through analysis of selected compositions and an exploration of Canadian music-related industries.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P55 or permission of the instructor.
Note: basic fluency in musical notation is required.
MUSI 3P92
Applied Studio Recital Co-Requisite I
Individual instruction in one of the following: piano, organ, voice, classical guitar or any approved concert band and orchestral instrument.
Private instruction, 30 minutes per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals
Restriction: open to BMus majors and permission of the Department; audition required.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 2F81, 2F91, 2F92, 2P82.
Corequisite(s): MUSI 4P01.
Note: must be taken in support of a BMus elective recital.
MUSI 3P93
Conducting II
Advanced topics and techniques in conducting.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P93.
Corequisite(s): one of MUSI 2P84, 2P86, 2P88, 2P89, 3P84, 3P86, 3P88, 3P89, 4P84, 4P86, 4P88, 4P89.
Note: keyboard skills strongly recommended.
MUSI 3P94
Choral Pedagogy
Practical and theoretical approaches to choral ensemble leadership. Topics include vocal technique, repertoire selection, rehearsal approaches, performance practice and audience development as applied to particular communities of singers.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 1P87, 1P88, 1P89.
Corequisite(s): one of MUSI 2P87, 2P88, 2P89, 3P87, 3P88, 3P89, 4P87, 4P88, 4P89.
Note: previous completion of MUSI 2P45 and 2P93 recommended. Field-trip fees may be required.
MUSI 3P95
Aesthetics of Music
Issues of meaning, beauty, value and greatness in music and its relation to the arts and society through analysis of selected readings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P55 or permission of the instructor.
MUSI 3V10-3V19
Music Area Studies
Selected topics in musicology, music theory, music education, music cognition or music performance.
MUSI 3Y05
Aural Skills II
Aural perception of diatonic and chromatic musical materials, meter and rhythm through sight- singing, dictation and recognition exercises.
Lab, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2Y05 or permission of the instructor.
MUSI 3Y06
Keyboard Harmony II
Continuation of scales, triads, cadences, figured bass and sight reading skills, and melodic harmonization and extended harmonic progressions.
Lab, 1 hour per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2Y06 or permission of the instructor.
MUSI 4F81
Applied Lessons IV
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one MUSI 3F81, (3F92 (3P92), 3F91, 3P82 (3P81).
Note: lesson fee; consult the Department. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 4P81 and 4F92.
MUSI 4F91
Solo Performance III
Continuation of instrumental or vocal study. Preparation and execution of a public recital program under the supervision of the student's principal teacher.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: open to BMus (Performance) majors and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3F91 (recital minimum 80 percent).
Note: concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required. Recital program must be approximately 60 minutes of music.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 4F92.
MUSI 4F92
Applied Music IV
Continuation of instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 1 hour per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: open to BMus majors and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3F92 or permission of the Department.
Note: Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 4F81, 4F83 and 4F91.
MUSI 4F99
Honours Thesis
Thesis in an historical, theoretical, creative or applied area in which the student has developed a particular interest.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: to be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise that study. A written proposal must be submitted to the Department for approval by April 1.
MUSI 4P01
Recital I
Preparation and execution of a public recital program under the supervision of the student's principal teacher.
Private instruction, 30 minutes per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2F92 (2P92) (jury minimum 80 percent) or MUSI 3F92 (3P92) (jury minimum 80 percent).
Corequisite(s): MUSI 3P92 or 4P92
Note: lesson fee may be required. Recital program must be approximately 45 minutes of music. A written proposal must be submitted to the Department for approval by April 1.Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 3P02.
MUSI 4P02
Recital II
Preparation and execution of a public recital program under the supervision of the student's principal teacher.
Private instruction, 30 minutes per week.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3F91 (recital minimum 80 percent) or 4P01 (3P02) (minimum 80 percent).
Corequisite(s): MUSI 4P92
Note: Note: lesson fee may be required. Recital program must be approximately 60 minutes of music. A written proposal must be submitted to the Department for approval by April 1.
MUSI 4P50
History of Music in the Middle Ages
Styles, forms and genres from the earliest notated plainchant (c. 850) to the beginning of the Renaissance (c.1425) through investigating original sources in facsimile and analysis of selected compositions and readings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P90 and 2P55.
MUSI 4P51
History of Music in the Renaissance
Styles, forms and genres from the time of Machaut (c. 1350) to the early works of Monteverdi (c. 1600) through analysis f selected compositions and readings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 1P90 and 2P55.
MUSI 4P55
History of Music and Liturgy to 1600
Music in Christian liturgy from the Middle Ages to the end of the Renaissance.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 4P50 or 4P51.
MUSI 4P60
Composition and Orchestration
Guided composition in larger forms, analyzing selected works. Orchestration/arranging for full orchestra or chorus.
Tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P95.
MUSI 4P61
Form and Analysis
Review of the major musical forms of the common practice period, including binary, ternary, rondo and sonata forms, through examination of multi-movement sonatas, concertos, suites, and early contrapuntal forms. Function of rhythm, harmony and motivic relations at local and large-scale levels of musical structure.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P95.
Note: may be offered online.
MUSI 4P62
Choral Arranging
Arranging pre-existing compositions for different types of choirs, both a cappella and with accompaniment. Topics include voice types, registers, notation, text setting, textures, forms, styles and extended choral techniques.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2F90 or 2P95.
MUSI 4P65
Chromatic Harmony
Advanced chromatic harmonic techniques from the 19th and early 20th centuries. Analysis and composition of tonal music in the romantic tradition, including examples from post-romanticism, impressionism, Tin-Pan Alley and early Hollywood.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of instructor.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P95.
MUSI 4P67
Musical Acoustics
Principles and practice of acoustics for musicians. Pitch, loudness, timbre, tuning systems, the human voice, musical instruments, room acoustics, microphones and electronic processing.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one MUSI credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or above.
MUSI 4P76
Chamber Music Outreach II
Preparation, organization and performance of a live and/or virtual concert for traditional or non-traditional chamber-music group (trio or quartet). Student will assume a greater leadership role than in MUSI 3P76.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for one term; performances as required
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3P76 or permission of the Department.
MUSI 4P78
Jazz Ensemble IV
Selected jazz arrangements in rehearsal and performance. Advanced development of chart reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; performances as required
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 2P48 and 3P78.
Note: Instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 4P80
Secondary Studio III
Continuation of study of second instrument or voice.
Private instruction, 0.5 hours per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3P80.
Corequisite(s): MUSI 4F91.
Note: lesson fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
MUSI 4P82
Applied Studio IV
Continuation of individual instrumental or vocal study.
Private instruction, 0.5 hour per week for two terms; auditing performance seminar, 2 hours per week for two terms.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 3F81, 3F92 (3P92), 3F91, 3P82.
Note: lesson fee; consult the Department. Concert fee. Attendance at Department of Music professional Encore concert series required.
MUSI 4P84
Wind Ensemble IV
Selected wind literature in rehearsal and performance. Further development of sight-reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in dress rehearsals and concert performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3P84.
MUSI 4P86
String Orchestra IV
Selected orchestral literature in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of sight-reading, technical and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two term; performances as required.
Restriction: permission of the Department (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3P86.
Note: previous ensemble experience recommended. Instrumentalists from the University and community are encouraged to audition.
MUSI 4P87
Male Voice Choir IV
Selected choral literature for male voices in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 3P87, 3Y87, 3Y88, 3Y89.
Note: advanced sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 4Y87.
MUSI 4P88
Female Voice Choir IV
Selected choral literature for female voices in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 3P88, 3Y87, 3Y88, 3Y89.
Note: advanced sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 4Y88.
MUSI 4P89
Mixed Voice Choir IV
Selected choral literature in rehearsal and performance. Continued development of vocal and interpretive skills.
Rehearsals, 3 hours per week for two terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: permission of the instructor (audition) required; consult the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 3P87, 3P88, 3P89.
Note: advanced sight-singing skills. Score deposit is required. Concert uniform is required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in MUSI 4Y89.
MUSI 4P92
Applied Studio Recital Co-Requisite II
Individual instruction in one of the following: piano, organ, voice, classical guitar or any approved concert band and orchestral instrument.
Private instruction, 30 minutes per week; performance seminar, 2 hours per week; required participation in student recitals.
Restriction: open to BMus majors and permission of the Department; audition required.
Prerequisite(s): one of MUSI 3F81, 3F91, 3F92, 3P82.
Corequisite(s): MUSI 4P01 or 4P02.
Note: must be taken in support of a BMus elective recital.
MUSI 4P99
Independent Study
Research project in an historical, theoretical, creative or applied area in which the student has developed a particular interest.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: to be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise that study. A written proposal must be submitted to the Department for approval by April 1.
MUSI 4V10-4V19
Advanced Music Area Studies
Selected topics in musicology, music theory, music education, music sciences or music performance.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
MUSI 4V11
Creative Leadership in Music
Issues, trends, and best practices in the artistic and administrative roles of music leaders in educational institutions and community organizations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to MUSI (single or combined) and MUSC majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING COURSES
MUSI 3P75
Music in the Community I
Application of musical knowledge and development of professional skills in the field.
Practicum, 50 hours over 2 terms; participation in field assignments as required
Restriction: open to MUSI (single or combined) and MUSC majors with a minimum of 10.0 overall credits, a minimum of 75 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Note: field-trip fees may be required. Off-campus placement in music education, music therapy, music administration or community music.
MUSI 4P75
Music in the Community II
Continued application of musical knowledge and skills in the field.
Practicum, 50 hours over 2 terms; participation in field assignments as required.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): MUSI 3P75.
Note: field-trip fees may be required. Off-campus placement in a setting either similar to or contrasting with MUSI 3P75.
Administrative Assistant
Natalie Fedj
905-688-5550, extension 3817
Marilyn I. Walker 228
brocku.ca/music
music@brocku.ca
The goal of the Department of Music, part of the Marilyn I. Walker School of Fine and Performing Arts, is to prepare students for their chosen musical career and to produce critically aware musicians with a broadly based musical education. The Department of Music offers programs of study leading to a Bachelor of Music (BMus) Honours, a Bachelor of Arts (BA) Honours in Music, a BA with Major in Music and a Pass BA degree program. Students may also pursue a combined major or a minor in Music.
BMus and BA Honours students may earn a Concentration in Music Education or a Concentration in Music Therapy Foundations. BMus students may declare a Concentration in Music Performance following a successful audition. All concentrations are satisfied by successfully completing designated courses in addition to general program requirements. Alternatively, students may earn a BMus or a BA Honours degree without declaring a concentration.
Students take core courses in music in culture, theory, general musicianship and choral ensemble. Students in the BMus program must take lessons in one of the following areas: piano, pipe organ, voice, classical guitar, harp, flute, oboe, clarinet, classical saxophone, bassoon, trumpet, French horn, trombone, tuba, percussion, violin, viola, cello and double bass. If lessons are not taken in successive years, students must re-audition.
Student progress will be evaluated annually. To continue in the BMus program students must achieve a minimum grade of 60 percent in all MUSI courses and a minimum 70 percent major average. Any student who does not meet these requirements will be placed in the BA with Major program. To re-declare to BMus a student must upgrade any MUSI course in which the minimum of 60 was not achieved and raise their major average to 70 percent. Otherwise students may continue in the BA with Major program.
The requirement for graduation with a BMus or BA (Honours) is a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average. The requirement for graduation with a BA with Major is a minimum 60 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent overall average.

64

Neuroscience
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
NEUROSCIENCE COURSES
NEUR 1P01
Planning For Success in the Neurosciences
Foundation for success in neuroscience. Current topics in neuroscience, study skills, experiential learning opportunities and career opportunities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR majors.
#NEUR 2P36
Brain and Behaviour I
(also offered as PSYC 2P36)
Introduction to behavioural neuroscience and biological aspects of behaviour. Basics of the structure and function of the nervous system in relation to behaviour and activities of the brain from the neuron through to interrelationships among neural systems (central and peripheral nervous system, and hormonal regulation). Topics include neuronal function, drugs and behaviour, brain plasticity and recovery from injury, sensation and perception, and the organization of the brain emphasizing human behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR, HEAR, PSYC (single or combined), SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: material fees required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit earned in PSYC 2P35.
#NEUR 2P37
Brain and Behaviour II
(also offered as PSYC 2P37)
Physiological basis of neural mechanisms relevant to human actions and cognitions such as motivation (sleep, sexual behaviour, eating), emotions and stress, learning and memory, communication and language, and thought (psychological/psychiatric disorders).
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR, HEAR, PSYC (single or combined), SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36 or PSYC 2P35.
#NEUR 3P06
Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience
(also offered as PSYC 3P06)
Neural basis of human cognition, emphasizing contemporary methods in cognitive neuroscience. Methodology (e.g. neuroimaging), perception, memory, language, emotion, executive functions and social cognition.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR, PSYC (single or combined), SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 1.0 PSYC credit above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P35 or PSYC 2P36; one of NEUR 2P36, PSYC 2P20, 2P35, 2P49 or permission of the instructor.
#NEUR 3P34
Neurobiology
(also offered as BIOL 3P34)
Structure and function of nerve cells: Electrical properties of neurons, synaptic function and transmitters, neural plasticity and cellular basis of behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01).
#NEUR 3P39
Computer Data Analysis
(also offered as PSYC 3P39)
Applications of computers to management and analysis of data, including data entry, statistical procedures and interpretation of output, using SPSS.
Lectures/lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR and PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 77 percent major average, a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2F23.
Note: Neuroscience majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum of 8.0 overall credits may register. Contact the Department of Psychology.
NEUR 3P48
Directed Studies
Topics, readings and/or research chosen in consultation with a NEUR faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: NEUR majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36.
NEUR 3P49
Empirical Directed Studies
Empirical research project chosen in consultation with a NEUR faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: NEUR majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36.
#NEUR 3P59
Introduction to Human Neuropsychology
(also offered as PSYC 3P59)
Brain function and behaviour are through basic research on neuropsychological and neurocognitive function through clinical syndromes and cases. Topics include neural basis of perception, memory, language, motor control, emotion and executive functions. Recovery and advances in assessment, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of such functional deficits.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR, PSYC (single or combined), SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 1.0 PSYC credit above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36 or PSYC 2P35; PSYC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
#NEUR 3P67
Bases of Neuropsychopharmacology
(also offered as PSYC 3P67)
Mechanisms of drug action and classification of psychoactive agents. Elements of pharmacokinetics (drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination) and a review of the major groups of psychoactive agents including hypnotics, analgesics, anxiolytics, antidepressants, psychostimulants and neuroleptics, emphasizing mechanisms and consequences of drug action on selected neurotransmitter systems (dopaminergic, noradrenergic,cholinergic, serotonergic).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR, PSYC (single or combined) majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36 or PSYC 2P35; PSYC 1F90.
#NEUR 3P87
Behavioural Neuroscience
(also offered as PSYC 3P87)
Integrative approach to basic neuroscience focusing on behavioural analysis in animal models insights into brain and behaviour relations provided by the traditional and the latest techniques (e.g. stereotaxic surgery, DREADDs, viral vectors and optogenetics, transgenic organisms).
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hrs alternating weeks.
Restriction: open to NEUR and PSYC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36 and BIOL 1P92.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in NEUR (PSYC) 3F81, 3P81 and 3P82.
#NEUR 3P90
Investigative Neurobiology
(also offered as BIOL 3P90)
Methods used in neurobiology and neurophysiology. Electro-physiological techniques, including intracellular and extracellular recording from nerve cells and muscle, and on theory and techniques for electrophysiological data acquisition. Other topics include intracellular staining, immunocyto chemistry and assay procedures.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BCHM, BMED, BSc Integrated Studies (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BTEC and OEVI majors and BIOL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02 and 2P03 (2F01), or PSYC 2P36 and 2P37.
Note: BIOL 3P34 is strongly recommended for students who have not taken PSYC 2P36 and 2P37. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in NEUR (BIOL) 3P84.
NEUR 4F90
Honours Thesis
Each student will undertake a limited research project under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to NEUR majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: to be taken in conjunction with NEUR 4F91. Submission and oral defence of thesis is required.
NEUR 4F91
Literature Research and Seminar
Each student will undertake a detailed study of the scientific literature relevant to the topic of the honours thesis.
Restriction: open to NEUR majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: to be taken in conjunction with NEUR 4F90. The review will be included in the thesis and will be presented as a seminar.
NEUR 4F92
Library Research Essays
Each student will be required to carry out two detailed studies of the scientific literature under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to NEUR majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: for students not registered for NEUR 4F90 and 4F91. The results of the studies will be presented in major essays and presented as formal seminars. One research topic is to be completed each term.
NEUR 4P10
Advanced Directed Studies
Topic, readings and/or research chosen in consultation with a NEUR faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: NEUR majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36.
NEUR 4P11
Empirical Advanced Directed Studies
Empirical research project chosen in consultation with a NEUR faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: NEUR majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36.
#NEUR 4P55
Neural Mechanisms, Hormones and Behaviour
(also offered as PSYC 4P55)
Relations among the hormones of the endocrine system, the nervous system and behaviour; the involvement of hormones in sexual behaviour, the mechanisms of stress and cognition; relevant research methodologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR and PSYC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): NEUR 2P36 or PSYC 2P35.
NEUR 4V85-4V89
Special Topics in Neuroscience
Structure and content of course varies.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NEUR majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credit until date specified in Registration guide.
CO-OP COURSES
NEUR 0N01
Work Placement I
First Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
NEUR 0N02
Work Placement II
Second Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
NEUR 0N03
Work Placement III
Third Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
NEUR 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional Co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
NEUR 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional Co-op placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
NEUR 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): NEUR 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
NEUR 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): NEUR 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
NEUR 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): NEUR 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
NEUR 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): NEUR 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
NEUR 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to NEUR Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): NEUR 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistant
Elizabeth Horvath
905-688-5550, extension 3412
Mackenzie Chown MC B210
brocku.ca/neuroscience
Neuroscience, the study of behaviour and its underlying neural mechanisms, is included in psychology, biology and other disciplines at many universities, but there is an increased tendency in North America and Europe to offer neuroscience as a specialized major program. Neuroscience combines selected courses from the disciplines of psychology, biology, kinesiology and computational neuroscience that illustrate cellular, physiological, behavioural and computational approaches to examining the nervous system. The program is specifically designed to permit integration of information derived experimentally from many disciplines to gain a better understanding of the relationships between neural function and behaviour. Neuroscience provides information and skills necessary for careers in the health and behavioural sciences. It also provides a firm basis for graduate studies in the neurosciences and depending on choice of courses, prepares the student for entry into medicine, veterinary medicine, dentistry, chiropractic and physical or occupational therapy.
The BSc Honours program is divided into five streams, allowing students to specialize in either Neurobiological, Neuropsychological, Neuromotor, Neurocomputing or Environmental Neuroscience fields. Honours students must familiarize themselves with the Neuroscience streams and plan appropriately. The Office of the Registrar must be notified of the stream you wish to pursue at the end of Year 2 with the exception of the Neurocomputing stream students who need to notify in Year 1. Except for the Neuromotor and Neurocomputing streams, the first two years are identical in the program. Honours and Co-op students must apply for entry to Year 4 in order to complete NEUR 4F90, 4F91 or 4F92. Admittance requires a minimum 70 percent average in all major credits and an average of 60 percent in the remaining credits.
The BSc with Major program is designed to allow students to select courses that suit individual interests and may result in a program that is more general. However, it also offers freedom to specialize within sub-disciplines of neuroscience by following courses in any stream of the Honours program.
The Neuroscience Co-op program combines academic and work terms over a five-year period. Students spend two years in an academic setting studying the core concepts of neuroscience prior to taking the first work placement. The Co-op Programs Office will facilitate admission decisions. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, Neuroscience Co-op students are assessed an annual administrative fee (see the Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue in the Neuroscience Co-op program is based on the student's major and non-major averages. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average may continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Neuroscience Co-op program, but may continue in the non-Co-op Neuroscience streams. If a student subsequently raises his/her major average to 70 percent, the student may be readmitted only if approved by the Co-op Admissions Committee. For further information, see the Co-op Programs section of the Calendar, and contact the Centre for Neuroscience.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals(brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Programs Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Program Office.
The Neuroscience Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have honours standing and who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience.

65

Nursing
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
NUSC 1F18
Nursing Theory and Clinical Practicum: Experiencing Illness and Hospitalization
Introductory concepts in health, illness, and wellness. Theoretical application and integration of psycho-social-motor knowledge, skills and abilities related to nursing practice in caring for adult clients experiencing illness and hospitalization.
Theory, Lectures, 3 hours per week. Nursing Simulation Lab, 3 hours per week. Nursing Clinical Practicum, 9 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 1P10 and 1P12
Note: students require current CPR (BLS, Level C or HCP) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. All requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Gateway Inc.  by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade in NUSC 1P14 or 1P16.
NUSC 1P10
Professional and Therapeutic Communication
Concepts, principles and the practice of professional communication. Factors influencing the perception and interpretation of communication, including the use of self.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
NUSC 1P12
Nursing and Health Promotion: The Canadian Context
Philosophical and theoretical concepts of nursing and health, nursing professional standards and practice, Canadian Health Care System, primary health care, health promotion, and social determinants of health.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
NUSC 1P30
Health Assessment
Nursing theory and practice related to comprehensive and focused, holistic health assessments concentrated on the development of skills in history taking, physical examination, and health promotion techniques.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 1P10 and 1P12.
Note: offered online with weekly lab sessions in the Nursing Simulation Lab.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade in NUSC 2P30.
NUSC 2P10
Nursing Theory: Nursing Care of the Young Family
Nursing models and interdisciplinary theories, principles and concepts related to caring for children and the childbearing and childrearing family.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 1F18 (1P16).
Corequisite(s): NUSC 2P12.
NUSC 2P12
Nursing Practice: Nursing Care of the Young Family
Practice, application and integration of skills and theory in relation to caring for children and the childbearing and childrearing family.
15 hours per week, selected laboratory sessions.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 1F18 or 2P16.
Corequisite(s): NUSC 2P10.
Note: police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required. Agency policy will determine submission deadline. Check with Department. Students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. Immunization, CPR and mask fit requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
NUSC 2P14
Nursing Theory: Care of the Acutely Ill Client
Nursing models and interdisciplinary theories, principles and concepts related to caring for the acutely ill client and their families.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 1F18 (1P16).
Corequisite(s): NUSC 2P16.
NUSC 2P16
Nursing Practice: Care of the Acutely Ill Client
Practice, application and integration of skills and theory in relation to caring for the acutely ill client and their families.
15 hours per week, selected laboratory sessions.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 1F18 (1P16).
Corequisite(s): NUSC 2P14.
Note: police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Agency policies will determine submission deadline. Check with Department. Students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. All requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
NUSC 2P32
Pathophysiology
Application of pathophysiological concepts related to nursing practice. Relation to normal physiological processes as well as selected disease processes that impact on health.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week,
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 1F18 (1P16).
Note: may be offered online.
NUSC 2P70
Nursing Research
Critical appraisal of quantitative and qualitative nursing research to determine the evidence base for practice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and obtained credit in NUSC 3P70.
NUSC 3P08
Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative means of understanding and interpreting data in nursing research.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors. In Spring session, open to Nursing majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to Nursing, KINE, BSc (Kin), RECL and SPMA majors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade in MATH 1P98.
NUSC 3P12
Experiencing Chronicity
Nursing models and selected interdisciplinary theories, underlying foundations, principles and concepts related to chronicity and selected chronic conditions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 2P12 and 2P16.
Corequisite(s): NUSC 3P90.
NUSC 3P14
Promoting Mental Health
Nursing models and selected interdisciplinary theories, underlying foundations, principles and concepts related to adults, older adults, and families experiencing mental health challenges.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 2P12 and 2P16.
Corequisite(s): NUSC 3P92.
NUSC 3P20
Nursing Ethics
Ethical and legal principles, models and theories. Application to professional practice.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 2P12 and 2P16 or permission of the Chair.
NUSC 3P50
Health Education
Principles of teaching and learning and their impact on knowledge, awareness, attitudes, skills and behaviour. Assessment, planning, implementation and evaluation processes in development of a variety of health teaching strategies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 2P12 and 2P16 or permission of the Chair.
NUSC 3P90
Nursing Practicum: Experiencing Chronicity
Practice, application and integration of skills and theory in relation to individuals and families experiencing chronic conditions.
15 hours per week, selected laboratory sessions.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 2P12 and 2P16.
Corequisite(s): NUSC 3P12.
Note: Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Agency policies will determine submission deadline. Check with Department. Students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. All requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
NUSC 3P92
Nursing Practicum: Promoting Mental Health
Practice, application and integration of skills and theory in relation to adults, older adults, and families experiencing mental health challenges.
15 hours per week, selected laboratory sessions.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 2P12 and 2P16.
Corequisite(s): NUSC 3P14.
Note: Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required for the first day of clinical and cannot be greater than six months old. Students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. Immunization, CPR and mask fit requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
NUSC 3P94
Nursing Practicum: Intersession
Practice, application, and integration of skills and theory in a variety of health care settings.
120 hours over four to five weeks, selected laboratory sessions.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 3P12, 3P14, 3P90 and 3P92.
Note: students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. All requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied. A pass with conditions is not permitted in this course.
NUSC 4F92
Community Health Nursing
Theory and practice emphasizing primary health care principles, assessment and health promotion with individuals, families, aggregates and communities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; community practicum 15 hours per week; selected laboratory sessions.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 3P94.
Note: Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening is required. Agency policies will determine submission deadline. Check with Department. Students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. Immunization, CPR and mask fit requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied.
NUSC 4F93
Community Health Nursing (International)
Theory and practice emphasizing primary health care principles, assessment and health promotion with individuals, families, aggregates and communities in an international setting.
Lectures, 35 hours; practicum, 150 hours.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 3P94.
Note: proof of a valid passport; visa, immunization and CPR certification as required. Students will be required to submit an application to attend course. Students must be a minimum 18 years of age. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. A practicum fee will be applied.
NUSC 4F96
Integrated Nursing Practicum I
Practice, application and integration of skills and theory in a variety of health care settings.
35 hours per week for six weeks.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors with a minimum of 18.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 4F92 or 4F93.
Note: on campus lab/class activities will be required. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Agency policies will determine submission deadline. Check with Department. Students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. All requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied. A student may not pass with conditions.
NUSC 4F98
Integrated Nursing Practicum II
Practice, application and integration of skills and theory in a variety of health care settings.
35 hours per week for six weeks.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 4F96.
Note: on campus lab/class activities will be required. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Agency policies will determine submission deadline. Check with Department. Students require current CPR (BCLS or Level C) certification and annual re-certification, N-95 mask fit testing every two years, proof of Immunizations (Measles, Mumps, Rubella; Varicella; Hepatitis B; Tetanus/Diphtheria/Pertussis; Tuberculosis) as well as annual TB Skin Testing. All requirements must be valid through the clinical placement and submitted to Synergy Employment Services Inc. by June 1. Failure to comply with the due date will result in student not being permitted to register in clinical courses for the current academic year. Clinical practicum may be scheduled in the evening and/or on weekends. Transportation to clinical placement is a student responsibility. A practicum fee will be applied. A student may not pass with conditions.
NUSC 4P20
Leadership in Nursing and Management
Current issues, opportunities and challenges for nursing leadership in different nursing, community and organizational venues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 3P94 or permission of the Chair.
NUSC 4P32
Advanced Directed Readings
Variable subject matter designed in consultation with faculty member directing the course.
Restriction: permission of the Chair.
NUSC 4P50
Applied Nursing Research
Application of principles of research design, data collection, data analysis and dissemination through research projects.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 2P70 or permission of the Chair.
NUSC 4P60
Trends and Issues in Professional Nursing
Historical to current overviews of significant trends and issues impacting the profession of nursing. Image, burnout, environment, roles, culture, politics and economics affecting client and nursing care.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Nursing majors.
Prerequisite(s): NUSC 3P94.
Note: may be offered online.
*NUSC 4Q90
Foundations of Collaboration and Teamwork
(also offered as HLSC 4Q90, KINE 4Q90, RECL 4Q90 and SPMA 4Q90)
Core competencies for effective teamwork. Topics include collaborative leadership, team functioning, communication, role clarity, conflict management, and client-centred approach as it applies to a diversity of interprofessional settings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to NUBR, NUSC, BKin, BMED, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), CHHS, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, PHTH, RECL and SPMA majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Administrative Assistant
Jennifer Ritchie
905-688-5550, extension 4660
East Academic 303
brocku.ca/nursing
The four year Honours Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BScN) degree is offered in collaboration with Loyalist College. Students at the Brock site will remain at Brock University for the four years of the program. Students at the Loyalist College site will complete their first and second years there, moving to Brock University for the third and fourth years of the program. The program must be completed within 6 years. Graduates will be eligible to write the NCLEX-RN Examination and the College of Nurses of Ontario Jurisprudence Examination.

66

Oenology and Viticulture
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
OENOLOGY AND VITICULTURE COURSES
OEVI 0N11
Certification in Ontario Wine (Online)
Focusing on the wines and history of the Ontario wine region including an understanding of cool climate viticulture and winemaking, appellation systems, and VQA
Online
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public.  OEVI majors may take this course in year 2 or year 3. Includes the Craft Wineries Association Certification
OEVI 1P20
Introduction to Wines
Survey of wine producing regions of the world; principles of wine production. Topics include grape growing, fermentation and stabilization of wine, application of sensory science to the evaluation of wine quality, health aspects, classification, regulation and marketing of wine.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age.
OEVI 2P45
Cultural Practices
Site selection, pruning, training, canopy management, crop control, mechanization, soil management and vineyard establishment.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week; field trips.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): OEVI 2P99.
Note: field trip fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age.
OEVI 2P99
Grapevine Biology
Varieties, rootstocks, clones, physiology and biochemistry of grapevine growth and fruit maturation; soil science, winter hardiness; grapevine propagation.
Lectures, lab 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P91, 1P92 (1F90), CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
Note: field trip fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age.
#OEVI 3P14
Introduction to Soil Science
(also offered as GEOG 3P14)
Consideration of soil as a finite environmental resource. Physical, chemical, biological and hydrological processes within the soil system. Assessment and rehabilitation of contaminated soils.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): GEOG 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
OEVI 3P21
Wine Processing and Equipment
Theory and operation of grape and wine processing equipment in commercial wineries, including crushers, presses, filters, pumps, tanks; winery layout; sanitation and waste water management.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): OEVI 3P25, CHEM 1P91 and 1P92 (1F92).
Note: materials fee and field trip fee required. The laboratory section will include fermentations to demonstrate the equipment being used. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age.
*OEVI 3P25
Wine Chemistry
(also offered as BCHM 3P25)
Sugars, acids, nitrogenous compounds in grape juice; antimicrobial and antioxidant activity of sulphur dioxide; must adjustments; biochemistry of alcoholic and malo-lactic fermentation; bitartrate and protein stability; fining agents; wine aging and phenolic oxidation.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 2P02, 2P03 (2F01), CHEM 2P20 and 2P42.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. It is strongly recommended that students take BCHM 3P01 prior to or concurrent with OEVI 3P25.
*OEVI 3P98
Wine Microbiology
(also offered as BIOL 3P98)
Identification and enumeration of indigenous micro-organisms in grape must. Alcoholic fermentation; metabolism of nitrogen compounds and organic acids; production of sulphur compounds; killer yeasts; malolactic fermentation; wine spoilage micro-organisms; genetic improvement of wine yeasts.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): OEVI 3P25, BIOL 2P02, 2P03 (2F01) and 2P98.
Note: students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. It is strongly recommended that students take BIOL 3P50 prior to or concurrent with OEVI 3P98. Materials fee required.
OEVI 4F90
Research Project
Experimental research carried out under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: to be taken concurrently with OEVI 4F91.
OEVI 4F91
Thesis
Thesis will incorporate results of the research project and will form the basis of a seminar presented by the student.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Chair.
Note: to be taken concurrently with OEVI 4F90.
OEVI 4F92
Library Research Essays
Students will carry out two detailed studies of the scientific literature under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Co-ordinator.
Note: for students not registered in OEVI 4F90 and 4F91. The results of the studies will be presented in major essays and presented as formal seminars. One research topic is to be completed each term.
OEVI 4P20
Sensory Evaluation of Wine
Measurement techniques used in the sensory evaluation of wine, physiology of taste and olfaction, chemistry of aroma and flavour, and readings in current topics in sensory evaluation and sensory science.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors and certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): BIOL 1P96 or MATH 1P98.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. It is strongly recommended that OEVI 3P25 be taken prior to OEVI 4P20.
*OEVI 4P30
Grape Pest Management
(also offered as BIOL 4P30)
Biology and dynamics of grapevine pest activity - insects, diseases, weeds, nematodes, vertebrates. Integrated pest management approach looking at all aspects of control chemical, biological, cultural. Application techniques, pest identification and monitoring.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI, BCHM, BIOL (single or combined), BIOL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BTEC majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): OEVI 2P99.
*OEVI 4P92
Wine Marketing
(also offered as MKTG 4P92)
Understanding the wine consumer, segmentation, positioning, marketing mix, marketing research, marketing strategy, domestic and international wine marketing issues.
Lectures, case discussion, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors and OEVI certificate students or permission of the instructor.
OEVI 4V90-4V99
Special Topics in Oenology and Viticulture
Selected issues in Oenology and Viticulture on the basis of faculty expertise.
Restriction: open to OEVI majors.
Note: under certain circumstances a student may carry out, under faculty supervision a detailed study of the scientific literature pertinent to a specific topic. The results of this study will be presented as a major essay and as a formal seminar.
CO-OP COURSES
OEVI 0N31
Co-op Work Term
First co-op work placement in an appropriate sector of the Grape and Wine industry.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op majors.
OEVI 0N32
Co-Op Work Term II
Second co-op work placement in an appropriate sector of the Grape and Wine industry.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op majors.
OEVI 0N33
Co-op Work Term III
Third co-op work placement in an appropriate sector of the Grape and Wine industry.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op majors.
OEVI 0N34
Co-op Work Term IV
Fourth co-op work placement in an appropriate sector of the Grape and Wine industry.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op majors.
OEVI 0N35
Co-op Work Term V
Fifth work placement in an appropriate sector of the Grape and Wine industry.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op majors.
OEVI 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): OEVI 0N31.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
OEVI 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): OEVI 0N32.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
OEVI 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): OEVI 0N33.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
OEVI 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): OEVI 0N34.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
OEVI 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to OEVI Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): OEVI 0N35.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
INTERNSHIP COURSE
OEVI 0N41
Grape and Wine Technology Internship
Placement in an appropriate sector of the grape and wine industry.
Restriction: open to OEVC students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful internship performance evaluation.
NON-CREDIT COURSES
OEVI 0N01
Wine Appreciation - Exploring Varietals
Special interest course focusing on tasting wines from Canada and around the world. Learn and improve your skills and be able to distinguish among wine varieties including Chardonnay, Riesling, Merlot, Pinot Noir and Cabernet Sauvignon. Exploration of factors that affect wine quality.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public. OEVI majors may take this course in year 2 or year 3.
OEVI 0N02
Introduction to the Wines of Ontario
Special interest course focusing on the wines of Ontario: how they are grown and made. Become familiar with VQA wines and the viticultural areas in which they are grown.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public. OEVI majors may take this course in year 2 or year 3. Includes the Craft Winery Association (formerly the Wine Council of Ontario) Certification.
OEVI 0N03
Wine Appreciation - Wine Regions of the World
Deepening and refining wine tasting skills as well as exploring the major wine regions of the world. Discover wines from historic Old World regions as well as emerging New World wine regions including South Africa and New Zealand.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public.
OEVI 0N04
Wine Sales and Service
Insight into the wine consumer, practice the dimensions of quality service and learn how to 'sell' wine through facilitation rather than a 'hard' sell.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Prerequisite(s): OEVI 0N02 or permission of the Manager for Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public.
OEVI 0N05
WSET Award in Wine Level 1
Introductory course suitable for anyone wishing to start their wine education in a structured and concise way. Basic understanding of grape varieties, what makes wine different, service of wine as well as food and wine pairing.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public. This is a required course for successful completion of the Wine and Spirit Education Trust certification
OEVI 0N06
WSET Award in Wine Level 2
Dealing with all aspects of wine, learn major grape varieties and wine styles from key wine producing countries of the world and understand factors that influence wine quality and price.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public. Students will taste and compare styles as they are guided through the WSET Systematic Approach to Tasting. This is a required course for successful completion of the Wine and Spirit Education Trust certification
OEVI 0N07
WSET Award in Wine Level 3
Core knowledge of a wide range of wines from around the world.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. OEVI 0N06 is recommended or completion of an equivalent course and entrance test. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Qualification is designed for trade employees working in a supervisory capacity, answering customer queries or making informed selections of wines and spirits in a wide variety of situations. Available to the general public. This is a required course for successful completion of the Wine and Spirit Education Trust certification
OEVI 0N09
WSET Award in Spirits Level 1
Main styles and types of spirits through sight, smell and taste. Key factors affecting flavours and aromas.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public. Students will taste and compare spirits using the WSET Systematic Approach to Tasting. This is a required course for successful completion of the Wine and Spirit Education Trust certification.
OEVI 0N10
WSET Award in Spirits Level 2
Production methods, characteristics of the main tasting evaluation using the WSET Systematic Approach to Tasting. Spirits will include rum, gin, brandy, tequila, vodka, whiskies and liqueurs.
Restriction: permission of the Manager, Continuing Education program.
Note: materials fee required. Students must be a minimum of 18 years of age. Available to the general public. This is a required course for successful completion of the Wine and Spirit Education Trust certification.
Administrative Assistant
Leslie Wenzl
905-688-5550, extension 3388
Mackenzie Chown MC F234
brocku.ca/ccovi/index/9/academic_programs
This four-year Honours program leading to a Bachelor of Science in Oenology and Viticulture is designed to meet the needs of the grape and wine industry in Canada and around the world. The aim of the program is to provide a comprehensive scientific education combined with hands-on experience in oenology and viticulture, including exposure to marketing, tourism and wine appreciation. Since "wine begins in the field and ends in the glass", our graduates will be trained in both viticulture and oenology with the option to specialize through course selection and undergraduate thesis work. The program encompasses the scientific disciplines pertaining to the grape and wine industry such as sensory science, biochemistry, biotechnology, chemistry, microbiology, genetics, cell and molecular biology, plant physiology, and environmental biology. The program enables our graduates to pursue higher education in any of these disciplines.
Industry experience is an essential part of our students' preparation. To gain that experience students may elect to complete a Co-op option with their degree. Co-op students will participate in a minimum of three work terms as indicated in the program of study. At least one work term will be in a vineyard setting and a second term will be at a winery during the harvest and crush.
These work terms will be paid positions providing a meaningful, academically relevant employment experience within the grape and wine industry. The primary goal of the Oenology and Viticulture Co-op Program is to arrange and monitor placements within the Canadian industry. However, suitable international work terms may be used to meet the program requirements. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, students are assessed an administrative fee (see the Schedule of Fees).
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Programs Office. Eligibility to continue in the Co-op option is based on the student's major and non-major averages. A student with a minimum of 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average may continue.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Program Office.
Work terms will normally be done as indicated in the Program of Studies but other sequences are possible. For more information consult the Director of Co-op Programs, Admissions and Academic Adviser or the Co-operative Programs section of the calendar.
The program of Oenology and Viticulture is associated for the purposes of research with the Cool Climate Oenology and Viticulture Institute (CCOVI).

67

Philosophy
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
PHIL 1F90
Introduction to Philosophy: Philosophical Classics and Contemporary Life
Contemporary problems viewed through a variety of philosophical writings. Students are encouraged to formulate and examine their own beliefs about freedom, knowledge, religion, love and questions of right and wrong.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 1F91, 1F93, 1F94, 1F95, 1F96 and 1F97 except with permission of the department.
PHIL 1F91
Introduction to Philosophy: Human Nature
How do we see ourselves- Who are we- What are we- A critical analysis and evaluation of classical and contemporary views of human nature from a variety of philosophical and religious traditions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 1F90, 1F93, 1F94, 1F95, 1F96 and 1F97 except with permission of the department.
PHIL 1F93
Introduction to Philosophy: The Foundations of the Present
An attempt to place the philosophical issues which confront the reflective individual today in their historical context by examining the teachings and arguments which shape our views of such matters as body and soul, life after death, truth and knowledge, faith and moral responsibility.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 1F90, 1F91, 1F94, 1F95, 1F96 and 1F97 except with permission of the department.
PHIL 1F94
Introduction to Philosophy: Problems
Central problems of philosophy as living questions for reflection, dialogue and debate, including: Is the external world really there- Does God exist- Can I really know anything- What is a person- Is everything permissible- Can my life have meaning-
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 1F90, 1F91, 1F93, 1F95, 1F96 and 1F97 except with permission of the department.
PHIL 1F95
Introduction to Philosophy: The Meaning of Life
Exploration of theories and strategies (both ancient and contemporary) related to finding meaning in life, combating self-defeating behavior, and optimizing choices and results in dynamic field. Authors may include: Plato, Aristotle, the Stoics, Susan Wolf, Michael Bratman, Richard Holton, L.A. Paul, Agnes Callard, and Edward McClennen.
Lectures, Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 1F90, 1F91, 1F93, 1F94, 1F96 and 1F97 except with permission of the department.
PHIL 1F96
Introduction to Philosophy: Narratives of Reason
Examinations of practical, instrumental and theoretical rationality as expressed in the tensions between self and other, ethics and politics, religion and science, reality and fantasy. Authors may include: Plato, Descartes, Machiavelli, Kant, Freud, Zemyatin, and Asimov.
Lectures, Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 1F90, 1F91, 1F93, 1F94, 1F95 and 1F97 except with permission of the department.
PHIL 1F97
Introduction to Philosophy: Why Philosophize?
Examination of the most fundamental questions: What is philosophy? Why should we do it? What is thinking about thinking? Philosophy as a personal and social exercise with ethical, political, and economic implications, explored in part through the pedagogy of philosophy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 1F90, 1F91, 1F93, 1F94, 1F95 and 1F96 except with permission of the department.
PHIL 2P00
Pre-Socratics to Plato
Survey of Western philosophy from its birth in the Pre-Socratics (sixth century BC) to Plato.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P01
Growth of Greek Philosophy: Aristotle and Beyond
Survey of Western philosophy from Aristotle, the Hellenistic schools (Epicurean, Stoic, Sceptic) to Plotinus (third century AD).
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P02
Early Modern Philosophy: The Rationalists
Classical philosophies of Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries as found in the writings of the Continental Rationalists (Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz).
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P03
Early Modern Philosophy: The Empiricists
Classical philosophies of England, Ireland and Scotland in the 17th and 18th centuries as found in the writings of the British Empiricists (Locke, Berkeley and Hume).
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P05
Reason and Experience
Arguments and debates concerning reason and experience in 17th- and 18th-century philosophy. Key figures may include Descartes, Malebranche, Locke, Spinoza and Hume.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P09
Ethics: Major Ethical Theories and Philosophies of Life
Examines Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Mill and contemporary thinkers.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P12
Indian Philosophy: An Introduction to Hindu Thought
Hindu thought beginning with the Vedic myths, through the Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita to the systems of the Vedanta. Topics include Karma, reincarnation, altered states of consciousness, Maya, the problem of knowledge, the role and nature of God, the theory and practice of yoga.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P12.
PHIL 2P13
Indian Philosophy: An Introduction to Buddhist Thought
Buddhist thought from Prince Siddhartha's enlightenment and subsequent Deer Park Sermon (the basis of Hinayana) through the Perfection of Wisdom to Madhyamika Buddhism (the Mahayana representative) to Zen (the silence of the Buddha). Topics include Nirvana, non-self, one-hand clapping.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P13.
PHIL 2P14
The Beginnings of Existential Thinking
The sources of both theistic and atheistic lived philosophy in such figures as Kierkegaard and Nietzsche.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P15
The Growth of Existential Thinking
The work of such philosophers as Heidegger, Sartre and Camus.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P16
Existentialism
Origins, growth and development of this lived philosophy from Kierkegaard and Camus.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P17
Introduction to Chinese Philosophy
Confucian, Taoist and Chinese Buddhist philosophical traditions examined in conjunction with appropriate texts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P17.
PHIL 2P18
Postmodernism
Philosophical perspectives arising from Nietzche and Heidegger emphasizing ethics, politics, language and ontology. Readings may include Nancy, Baudrillard, Virilio, Lyotard, Foucault, Deleuze and Guattari.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P20
Abrahamic Religious Thought
Roots of the monotheisms of Judaism, Christianity and Islam: Who and what is God? What is our relationship to God? What are the ethical bases of religion? What is the nature of faith?
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor
PHIL 2P25
Introduction to Logic
Modern deductive logic. Development of the ability to analyse arguments in order to determine their worth. Arguments will be symbolized in order to clarify their form and to determine their validity or invalidity.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
PHIL 2P50
Creatures, Cyborgs and Carnality
Engaging critical issues such as human nature, self-identity, religion, society, ethics, politics, economics, science and technology in classic, contemporary and award-winning science fiction stories and novels.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 2P91
Philosophical Psychology
Thinkers and the philosophical debates which inform psycho-analytic/psychological theory, including Brentano, Freud, Sartre, Ricoeur, Lacan, as well as more contemporary thinkers such as Nancy, Lacoue-Labarthe.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL or PSYC credit or permission of the instructor.
*PHIL 2P95
Bioethics
(also offered as BIOL 2P95)
Value conflicts and moral dilemmas in biology and medicine. Emphasis on specific case studies in reproductive interventions, medical experimentation, concepts of "health" and "disease", modification of behaviour, lifestyle choices, allocation of scarce or expensive medical resources, and death and dying.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL or BIOL credit or permission of the instructor.
Note: may count as an elective, but not as a major credit in an Honours BIOL (single or combined) program.
PHIL 2P97
Philosophy of Religion
Traditional issues, such as the proofs for the existence of God, the problem of evil, the relationship of faith to reason and the nature of religious knowledge.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit in PHIL or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 2P98
Philosophy in Literature
Philosophical issues in literature, such as writing, phenomenology of language, the nature of meaning, the role of the reader, literary work of art, problems of freedom, determinism and values.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 2P99
Gender Ethics and Sexuality
Application of ethics to questions of human sexuality. Topics include sexual values, the semantics of sex, the concepts of the romantic and eternal-feminine, respect for the personhood of women, censorship, pornography, legal enforcement of morality, sex in advertising, prostitution and AIDS.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
#PHIL 2Q91
Indigenous Ways of Knowing
(also offered as CANA 2Q91 and EDUC 2Q91)
Exploration of philosophical and practical applications of Indigenous epistemologies and ontologies in the context of education and civilization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 2Q90.
*PHIL 2Q98
The Philosophy of Art
(also offered as VISA 2Q98)
Classical theories of art through analysis of painting, photography, video, film, music and drama examining such concepts as beauty, creativity, artistic intention, perception, interpretation, and the nature and possible role of art.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3M50-3M59
Selected Topics in Philosophy
Selected issues on the basis of faculty expertise.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit in PHIL or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P01
Theory of Knowledge
Fundamental distinctions in the theory of knowledge, such as knowledge and belief, the empirical and the a priori, analytic/synthetic, scientific versus metaphysical knowledge.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P02
Metaphysics
Major problems of metaphysics, considering the question of what there is. Topics may include the nature of space and time, the mind-body relation, substance and property, universals and particulars, causation, identity and personal identity.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P18
The Technological Dimension
Philosophical perspectives on technology. Key thinkers may include Heidegger, Ellul, Baudrillard, Stiegler, Borgmann, or Gehlen.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
*PHIL 3P19
The Rise of Christian Philosophy
(also offered as MARS 3P19)
Philosophy from the patristic period through Erigena and Anselm up to and including the 12th-century Renaissance.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
*PHIL 3P63
Contemporary Feminist Philosophy
(also offered as WGST 3P63)
Feminist thinkers and the philosophical debates which inform contemporary feminist theory including, but not limited to, questions of race, class, gender/sex, power and post-colonialism. Thinkers include Alcoff, Butler, de Beauvoir, Code, Chodorow, Fraser, Gilligan, Harding, Hartsock, Irigaray, Kristeva, MacKinnon and Spivak.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, one WGST credit, or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P80
Environmental Philosophy
Ethical and conceptual problems in connection with humanity's relations to nature, in terms of survival and future social organization. What are the costs of progress and development- What kind of ethical responsibilities do we have for future generations and for non-human living creatures- Examination of economic, political, human-ecological and eco-philosophical theories.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P90
Critical Study of a Classical Philosophy: Plato
In-depth examination of the works of Plato.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHIL 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P91
Critical Study of a Classical Philosophy: Aristotle
In-depth examination of the works of Aristotle.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHIL 2P01 or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P92
Hermeneutics
Philosophical theory of interpretation and understanding, with special reference to the methods employed in the humanities (history, literary criticism); the problems of hermeneutics in the works of such thinkers as Gadamer, Ricoeur, Heidegger and Habermas.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P93
Phenomenology
The work of such philosophers as Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Scheler and others.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P94
Gandhi and Non-Violence
Gandhi as an original philosopher contributing to contemporary ontology. Implications of his thought for applied philosophy of personal, social and international reform, especially in light of its encounters with the forces of violence. Universal relevance of his thought to our technological times, and the relation between his ideas and the Indian tradition.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHIL 2P12, 2P13 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 3P94.
PHIL 3P95
Issues in 17th-Century Philosophy
Special issue or a particular thinker of central importance in the classical period of modern philosophy. Where it does not focus upon one individual (Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz), the course will trace the development of an issue (causality, mind-body union, the doctrine of substance) through its classical origins.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 3V95.
PHIL 3P96
Studies in 19th- and 20th-Century Continental Philosophy I
Critical examination of a key figure of central importance in modern and contemporary philosophy such as Marx, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Foucault, Habermas, Derrida.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P97
Studies in 19th- and 20th-Century Continental Philosophy II
Critical examination of a key figure of central importance in modern and contemporary philosophy such as Marx, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Foucault, Habermas, Derrida.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3P99
Issues in 18th-Century Philosophy
Special issue or a particular thinker of central importance in the classical period of modern philosophy. Where it does not focus upon one individual (Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant), the course will trace the development of an issue (substance, causality) or debate (realism vs. empirical and transcendental idealism, empiricism vs. rationalism and Kantian criticism) through its classical origins.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHIL 3V99.
PHIL 3Q98
Transhumanism
Technological and intellectual trends in human hybridity and self-directed evolution, as well as critical examination of posthumanism and pseudo-religious attitudes about the so-called singularity. Key figures may include T. de Chardin, H. Morevec, M. Minsky and R. Kurzweil.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3V90-3V94
Comparative Studies in Philosophy
Historical and systematic study of one or more important themes as developed in ancient Greek, modern and contemporary philosophy and/or Eastern thought.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 3V95-3V99
Issues in 17th- and 18th-Century Philosophy
Special issue or a particular thinker of central importance in the classical period of modern philosophy. Where it does not focus upon one individual (e.g., Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant), the course will trace the development of an issue (e.g., causality, mind-body union, the doctrine of substance, personal identity) through its classical origins.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 4P02
Sartre
Study of the existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre as discussed in his literary and philosophical works.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor
PHIL 4P05
Nietzsche
Study of the philosophical ideas of Friedrich Nietzsche.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 4P15
Heidegger
Martin Heidegger's Being and Time and selected later works on themes such as fundamental ontology, analytic of Dasein, truth, language and art.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 4P20
Kant and the 18th Century
Historical study of the thought of Immanuel Kant in the context of the 18th-century enlightenment, normally focusing on Kant's critical philosophy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 4P21
Hegel and the 19th Century
Historical study of the thought of Georg W. F. Hegel in the context of the 19th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 4P22
Nineteenth-Century Philosophy
Historical study of the thought of a 19th-century thinker or thinkers, such as Marx, Feuerbach, Kierkegaard, Mill, Bradley or Bentham.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
PHIL 4P97
Honours Tutorial I
Directed intensive and individual study in an area in which a student has developed and displayed a particular interest.
Restriction: open to PHIL (single or combined) majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the Chair.
Note: requires consultation, in advance of registration, with a faculty member able to supervise the study. Proposals for a tutorial course must be approved by the Chair of the department by the last day for late registration.
PHIL 4P98
Honours Tutorial II
Directed intensive and individual study in an area in which a student has developed and displayed a particular interest.
Restriction: open to PHIL (single or combined) majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 10.0 overall credits and permission of the Chair.
Note: requires consultation, in advance of registration, with a faculty member able to supervise that study. Proposals for a tutorial course must be approved by the Chair of the department by the last day for late registration.
PHIL 4V06-4V14
Contemporary Studies in European Philosophy
The work of one or more thinkers prominent in recent Continental thought.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): One PHIL credit or permission of instructor.
PHIL 4V15-4V29
Modern Philosophical Studies
Advanced course devoted to one or more of the major thinkers of the tradition from Descartes to the present day.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of instructor.
PHIL 4V24
2021-2022: Philosophical Methodologies
Examination of methods used by 19th century philosophers such as Hegelian Dialectics, Nietzschean Genealogy, Hermeneutics and Mill's logic and induction.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of instructor.
PHIL 4V30-4V45
Advanced Studies in Eastern Philosophy
Concentrated critical and interpretative study of selected texts in the areas of Advaita, Vedanta, Yoga, etc., Madhyamika and Yogacara schools of Buddhism, Daoism, or Confucianism.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of instructor.
PHIL 4V46-4V60
Advanced Studies in Comparative Philosophy
Selected issues on the basis of faculty expertise.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one PHIL credit or permission of instructor.
Administrative Assistant
Lauren Stewart
905-688-5550, extension 3315
International Centre, Glenridge 573B
brocku.ca/philosophy
Philosophy, defined as the pursuit of wisdom, encompasses the exploration of the nature of reality, consciousness, values, knowledge, reason, argument and evidence. Students study not only the primary texts of the Western philosophical tradition, but also major texts of Indian and Chinese thought. Students are encouraged to investigate critically and dialectically their own views and values.

68

Physical Education

69

Physics
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
ASTRONOMY COURSES
ASTR 1P01
Introduction to Astronomy I
Description of the appearance of the night sky, history of astronomy, light and telescopes, measuring the properties of stars, structure and functioning of the Sun.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
ASTR 1P02
Introduction to Astronomy II
Formation and evolution of stars, properties of some unusual astronomical objects, such as pulsars and black holes, galaxies, cosmology and a discussion of the planets of the solar system.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: ASTR 1P01 is highly recommended.
ENGINEERING COURSES
ENGS 1P01
The Humanist Engineer
Engineering design and construction problems, solutions, and new challenges.
seminar, laboratories, 5 hours per week.
ENGS 2P02
Invitational Education Theory for Engineers
Exploration of teaching, learning, and practice of engineering from the perspectives of Self, Others, Knowledge, Organizations and Societal Good.
On-line delivery.
Restriction: open to students in the Minor of Engineering Science.
ENGS 3P12
Feeding the World: Restorative Engineering
Engineering techniques to protect and remediate the environment. Topics include site remediation (brownfields, agricultural land, greenhouse, fish treatment plant, etc.), ecosystem restoration, and waste management. Analysis of biocommodity production from the treatment of different waste streams through the concept of circular economy.
Seminar, laboratories, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students in the Minor of Engineering Science.
ENGS 3P21
Shaping the Future: New Automation
Human and non-human interactions, based on the notion of metaphorical software robots and artificial intelligence for processing transactions, managing data, triggering responses and communicating with digital systems.
Seminar, laboratories, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students in the Minor of Engineering Science.
ENGS 3P22
Shaping the Future: Energy Frontiers
Exploration of frontiers of energy generation and consumption, their intersections with industry, environment and society. Examination of energy demand and its determinants, energy usage effectiveness and efficiency, policy dimension of energy and climate change, and potential impacts on ecosystems.
Seminar, laboratories, 5 hours per week
Restriction: open to students in the Minor of Engineering Science.
ENGS 3P41
Creating Healthy Communities: Human Mechanics
Invention of assistive devices for human augmentation (bionic technology, robotics and exoskeletons) to prolong and enhance lives. Assistive solutions for recovery from injury, improvement of sport mechanics, assistance for the elderly, and optimization of human performance for occupational workers.
Seminar, laboratories, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students in the Minor of Engineering Science.
ENGS 3P42
Creating Healthy Communities: Inclusive Cities
Smart cities and navigation of the urban environment. Adaptation to climate change, sustainable methods of transportation, reducing, reusing, and recycling waste, and making urban centers more compassionate. Consideration of local needs of St. Catharines and neighboring cities.
Seminar, laboratories, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students in the Minor of Engineering Science.
PHYSICS COURSES
PHYS 1P21
Introductory Physics I
Kinematics, Newton's laws and their applications to equilibrium and dynamics; conservation laws; oscillations, waves and sound.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
Note: students may not concurrently register in PHYS 1P91.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHYS 1P91.
PHYS 1P22
Introductory Physics II
Statics and dynamics of fluids; heat and thermodynamics; geometrical and wave optics; electric and magnetic forces; DC circuits; atomic and nuclear physics.
Lectures, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students may not concurrently register in PHYS 1P92.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHYS 1P23, 1P92 and 1P93.
PHYS 1P91
Introductory Physics I with Laboratory
Combination of lectures in PHYS 1P21 with a laboratory session.
Lectures, 4 hours per week; lab, alternating weeks, 3 hours per week.
Note: students may not concurrently register in PHYS 1P21. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHYS 1P21.
PHYS 1P92
Introductory Physics II with Laboratory
Combination of lectures in PHYS 1P22 with a laboratory session.
Lectures, 4 hours per week; lab, alternating weeks, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P91 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students may not concurrently register in PHYS 1P22.Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHYS 1P22, 1P23 and 1P93.
PHYS 1P94
Introductory Physics III
Calculus-based course covering rotational and center-of-mass motion; work done by a variable force; electric and magnetic fields; electric potential and potential energy; magnetic induction; AC circuits and resonance; wave-particle duality; elements of modern physics. Use of computers for data acquisition, visualization and analysis; elements of computer programming; principles of scientific writing and communications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or 1P91; one of MATH 1P01, 1P05, 1P97 or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
PHYS 2P02
Introduction to Medical Physics
Physical and chemical interactions of ionizing radiations and their biological effects, structural imaging (magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound, computed tomography and optical microscopy); nuclear medicine, therapeutic applications of radiation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of 4U/M PHYS (SPH4U), PHYS 1P22, 1P92.
PHYS 2P20
Introductory Mechanics
Mechanics of particles and systems of particles by the Newtonian method; conservation of linear momentum, angular momentum and energy; elementary dynamics of rigid bodies; oscillators; motion under central forces; selected applications.
Lectures, problem sessions, 3 hours per week; lab, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or 1P91 (recommended); PHYS 1P22 or 1P92 (recommended); MATH 1P01 and 1P02, or MATH 1P05 and 1P06 (recommended).
Note: materials fee required.
PHYS 2P30
Introduction to Electronics
Conduction in metals and semi-conductors; circuit analysis; time-dependent currents, transients, AC circuits, filters, resonance; semi-conductor junction, diode and transistor; rectification, switching and amplification; operational amplifiers; combinatorial logic and circuits; sequential circuits, counters; analog-to-digital conversion; laboratory instruments.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or 1P91 (recommended); PHYS 1P22 or 1P92 (recommended); one MATH credit or permission of the instructor.
Note: no previous course in electricity/magnetism/electronics is required. Secondary school algebra and some basic calculus will be used in the quantitative sections. Materials fee required.
Completion of this course will replace previously obtained grade and credit in PHYS 2P31.
PHYS 2P42
Physics of the Universe
Structure, formation, and evolution of planets, stars, and galaxies; white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, and other exotic entities; the possibility of life on other planets, interstellar travel, and space colonies; dark matter and dark energy. Origin and ultimate fate of the universe. Applications of general relativity and quantum mechanics to astrophysics and cosmology.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or 1P91 (recommended); PHYS 1P22 or 1P92 (recommended); MATH 1P01 and 1P02, or MATH 1P05 and 1P06 (recommended); ASTR 1P01 and 1P02 (recommended).
Note: this course may include a field trip to an observatory.
PHYS 2P50
Modern Physics
Special relativity, photons, the wave-particle aspects of electromagnetic radiation and matter; introduction to wave mechanics; the hydrogen atom and atomic line spectra; orbital and spin angular momenta; lasers.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or 1P91 (recommended); PHYS 1P22 or 1P92 (recommended); MATH 1P01 and 1P02, or MATH 1P05 and 1P06 (recommended).
PHYS 2P51
Introduction to Classical and Modern Optics
Geometrical and wave optics, reflection, refraction, lenses, matrix methods, aberrations, gradient index phenomena including fibre optics, interference, coherence, holography, Fraunhofer and Fresnel diffraction, polarization.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or 1P91 (recommended); PHYS 1P22 or 1P92 (recommended); MATH 1P01 and 1P02, or MATH 1P05 and 1P06 (recommended).
Note: materials fee required.
PHYS 3P02
Cellular Biophysics
Introduction to the molecular biophysics of cellular membranes, structure and function of the major cell components (lipids, proteins and carbohydrates), experimental physical techniques, photobiology, biological electrokinetics, bioinformatics, biomechanics, and biomimetics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, alternate week, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 1P21 or 1P91 (recommended); PHYS 1P22 or 1P92 (recommended) or permission of the instructor.
PHYS 3P35
Electromagnetism I
Electric field, divergence and curl of electrostatic field; relation between electric work and energy; conductors; application of Laplace's and Poisson's equation in electrostatics; electrostatic field in matter; field in polarized object and linear dielectric.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03, 2P08 and 3P06.
PHYS 3P36
Electromagnetism II
Magnetostatics, divergence and curl of magnetic field; magnetic vector potential; magnetic field in matter; magnetization; field of magnetic object; magnetic field inside of linear and non-linear media; electrodynamics; Ohm's law; Faraday's law and Maxwell equations; energy and momentum in electrodynamics; electromagnetic waves.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3P35.
PHYS 3P41
Statistical Physics I
Introduction to probability distribution functions, accessible states, entropy, temperature, partition functions and relations to thermodynamic functions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P50.
PHYS 3P70
Introduction to Quantum Mechanics
Wave particle dualism, Schrodinger equation, solution of simple one-dimensional barrier problems and the harmonic oscillator, hydrogen atom, angular momentum theory, introduction to perturbation theory and variational methods.
Lectures, lab/problem sessions, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P50, MATH 2P03, 2P08 and 3P06.
PHYS 3P90
Classical Mechanics
Advanced treatment of the mechanics of particles and of rigid bodies; Lagrangian and Hamiltonian methods; Poisson brackets, applications to the theory of small oscillators and central force motions, elements of chaotic motions.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P20, MATH 2P03, 2P08 and 3P06.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHYS 3P20.
PHYS 3P91
Experimental Physics I
Laboratory experiments to be selected from atomic physics, nuclear physics, solid state physics.
Lab, 1 day per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P50 or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
PHYS 3P92
Experimental Physics (Electronics) II
Operational amplifiers, converters, switches, microcomputers and their application to physical measurements.
Lab, 1 day per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P30 (2P31) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required.
PHYS 3P93
Solid-State Devices
Principles of operation of solid-state devices, from the point of view of the quantum theory; electronic bands and conduction in semiconductors; operation and manufacture of silicon and germanium diodes, junction and field effect transistors; thin-film deposition technology; special topics.
Lectures, lab, 6 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3P70.
PHYS 3P94
Mathematical Methods in Physics
Techniques of mathematical physics in the context of physically relevant problems. Vector calculus in curvilinear coordinate systems, applied linear algebra, Fourier series and Fourier transforms, special functions of mathematical physics, and least-squares approximations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03, 2P08 and 3P06 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHYS 3V94.
*PHYS 3P95
Introduction to Mathematical Physics
(also offered as MATH 3P95)
Topics may include Calculus of variations, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics, field theory, differential forms, vector and polyvector fields, tensor fields, Lie derivative, connection, Riemann metric, Lie groups and algebras, manifolds, and mathematical ideas of quantum mechanics. Applications to theoretical physics.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03 and 2P08.
Note: MATH 2P12 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PHYS (MATH) 4P64.
PHYS 3V94-3V99
Special Topics
Topics may include techniques of mathematical physics and scientific computing.
Prerequisite(s): MATH 2P03, 2P08 and 3P06 or permission of the instructor.
PHYS 4F90
Research Project I
Small experimental, theoretical or applied physics research project to be carried out under the supervision of a member of the department.
Restriction: open to PHYS (single or combined) and CAST majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: the project may, under special circumstances, be started in the summer months. Students must consult with the Department Chair regarding their proposed program during the first week of lectures.
PHYS 4F91
Research Project II
Detailed experimental, theoretical or applied physics research project to be carried out under the supervision of a member of the department.
Restriction: open to PHYS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average or approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 4F90.
Note: the project may, under special circumstances, be started in the summer months. Students must consult with the Department Chair regarding their proposed program during the first week of lectures. PHYS 4F90 and 4F91 may be taken concurrently.
#PHYS 4P09
Solitons and Nonlinear Wave Equations
(also offered as MATH 4P09)
Linear and nonlinear travelling waves. Nonlinear evolution equations (Korteweg de Vries, nonlinear Schrodinger, sine-Gordon). Soliton solutions and their interaction properties. Lax pairs, inverse scattering, zero-curvature equations and Backlund transformations, Hamiltonian structures, and conservation laws.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of MATH 3P08, 3P09, 3P51, 3P52.
PHYS 4P10
Introduction to Scientific Computing
Computational methods and techniques commonly used in condensed matter physics research; graphing and visualization of data; elements of programming and programming style; use of subroutine libraries; common numerical tasks; symbolic computing systems. Discipline-specific scientific writing.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Note: case studies from various areas of computational physics. Preparation of documents and presentations.
PHYS 4P41
Statistical Physics II
Fundamental postulates, equilibrium statistical mechanics and its relation to thermodynamics. Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics are derived and applied in appropriate physical situations of non-interacting and interacting particles; fluctuations; elementary treatment of transport theory.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3P41 and 3P70.
PHYS 4P51
Quantum Mechanics
Postulates about states, observables, probabilities, change of state in a measurement, and time evolution. Dirac's bra and ket notation; representation and transformation theory. Two-level systems. Complete set of commuting observables and classification of states. Symmetries and their usage in classification of states.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3P70, MATH 3P04, 3P08 and 3P09.
PHYS 4P61
Nuclear Physics
Intrinsic properties of nuclei, nuclear binding energy; qualitative treatment of shell model; alpha, beta and gamma radioactivities, nuclear fission, characteristics of nuclear reactions.
Lectures, problem sessions, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P50 and 3P70.
PHYS 4P62
Modern Wave Optics: Optical Tweezers to Atom Clouds
Optical lattices, spatial light modulators, evanescent waves and their applications from biology to ultracold atoms. Laser cooling and optical trapping. Manipulation of crystal properties by light. Optical patterns: tweezers, mirrors, funnels, bottles. Maple-based coursework.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P51 and MATH 2P03 or permission of the instructor.
PHYS 4P70
Condensed Matter Physics I
Crystal structures and crystal binding; the vibration of atoms in solids and the thermodynamics of solids; introduction to transport properties of solids.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3P41 and 3P70.
PHYS 4P71
Condensed Matter Physics II
Energy bands in metals and semiconductors, dynamics of electrons, Fermi surfaces and transport properties of solids, magnetism, screening in electron gas, optical properties.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 4P70.
PHYS 4P92
Advanced Electronics Laboratory
Families of logic devices, selection and implementation techniques; synchronous and asynchronous sequential circuits; safety and physical constraints; programmable array logic designs; digital signal processing, optoelectronics; CAD; circuit layout.
Lab, 1 day per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 3P92.
Note: completion of a project from design to a working device is required.
#PHYS 4P94
Relativity Theory and Black Holes
(also offered as MATH 4P94)
Review of Special Relativity and Minkowski space-time. Introduction to General Relativity theory; the space-time metric, geodesics, light cones, horizons, asymptotic flatness; energy-momentum of particles and light rays. Curvature and field equations. Static black holes (Schwarzschild metric), properties of light rays and particle orbits. Rotating black holes (Kerr metric).
Lectures, 3 hours; lab/tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Prerequisite(s): PHYS 2P20, 2P50, MATH 2P03, 2P08 and 3P06 or permission of the instructor.
PHYS 4V80-4V89
Special Topics
Examples of topics are relativity and cosmology; surface physics and electronic states in ordered and disordered systems.
Lectures, problem sessions, 4 hours per week.
CO-OP COURSES
PHYS 0N01
Co-op Work Placement I
First co-op placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
PHYS 0N02
Co-op Work Placement II
Second co-op placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
PHYS 0N03
Co-op Work Placement III
Third co-op placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
PHYS 0N04
Co-op Work Placement IV
Co-op placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
PHYS 0N05
Co-op Work Placement V
Co-op placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
PHYS 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PHYS 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PHYS 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PHYS 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PHYS 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHYS C-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PHYS 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PHYS 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PHYS 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PHYS 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PHYS Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): SCIE 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PHYS 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistant
Elizabeth Horvath
905-688-5550, extension 3412
Mackenzie Chown B210
physics@brocku.ca
The department offers four-year programs of study leading to a Bachelor of Science (BSc) Honours in Physics, a BSc Honours Co-op option in Physics, a BSc with Major Physics and a three-year BSc Pass degree program. Students may take a single major in Physics or a combined major with Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Computer Science or Mathematics.
The core of the program is designed to provide an understanding of the principles and fundamental interactions of classical and quantum physics as well as many applications of these principles in technology and everyday life. It is possible for non-Physics degree students to take advanced courses, provided they have the physics and mathematics required in the year 1 Physics program. An experimental physics path of PHYS 2P30 and 3P92 or a modern physics path of PHYS 2P50 and 3P91 are possible.
The Physics Co-op program combines academic and work terms over a four and one-half year period. Students spend two years in an academic setting, where they acquire the necessary background prior to taking the first work placement. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, Physics Co-op students are assessed an annual administrative fee (see the Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue is based on the student's major average and non-major average. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average will be permitted to continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Physics Co-op program, but may continue in the Physics stream.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Programs Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Program Office.
The Physics Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have honours standing and who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience.
The department also offers a Minor in Physics program. The goal of this program is to introduce students to the fundamental concepts of various branches of physics and their applications. The selection of courses is tailored to the needs and interests of individual students with diverse backgrounds (philosophy, classics, business and finance, mathematics and other science programs). Students should consult one of the Undergraduate Student Advisers of the Physics Department (physics@brocku.ca or ext. 3412) to plan the sequence of courses most suited to their background and needs.

70

Policing and Criminal Justice

71

Political Science
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
POLITICAL SCIENCE COURSES
POLI 1P91
Courts and Politics: Great Cases in Constitutional Law
Constitutional cases - past and current, Canadian and non-Canadian - as an introduction to fundamental issues in the study of politics, and to the analysis of political and social phenomena.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
POLI 1P93
Canada and the Global Community
Impact of politics, economics, culture, society and globalization on Canada's role in the community of nations. Canadian political system in comparative perspective and trends in Canada's political development.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
POLI 1P95
Statehood, Ethnicity and Nationalism
Evolution of the modern state, origin of modern ethnic identities and politics of multi-ethnic states which are the vast majority in the international community. Case examples explore accommodation and conflict in situations of competing ethnic identities and nationalisms, with outcomes ranging from stable rule to civil war.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
POLI 1P96
Political Theory Through Film and Literature
Topics in political philosophy such as justice, power, equality, property and human nature through analysis of films and literature in conjunction with major texts in political theory.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
POLI 1P97
Politics and Sports
Examination of the place of sport in politics and society in a global context. Topics include political economy, globalization, nationalism, militarism, gender, colonialism, race and ethnicity, and transnational regulation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in POLI 3V91.
POLI 1P98
How Government Works
How democratic governments make and implement policy decisions. Who has input and influence in these decision-making and implementation processes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
POLI 2F12
The Government and Politics of Canada
Political institutions and processes of Canada including the constitution and federalism, regions and regionalism, the political attitudes and behaviour of Canadians, parties and elections, and the policy process.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 2F20
Introduction to International Relations
Theoretical and empirical grounding in the processes of world politics and globalization. From war and terrorism, to financial and environmental crises, to the future direction of the states system.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#POLI 2P03
Labour and Employment Law
(also offered as LABR 2P03)
Legal regulation of both union and non-union work in Canada. Topics may include employment standards, labour relations, human rights and labour relations boards.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99,one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
POLI 2P31
Comparative Politics: Political Institutions and Approaches
Systematic comparison of politics around the world. Topics may include comparative methodology, the modern state and its development, pathways to democracy, legislatures, the executive, the judiciary and electoral systems.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in POLI 2F30.
POLI 2P32
Comparative Politics: Society and Policy Issues
Systematic comparison of politics around the world and institutional and cultural forces shaping them. Topics may include policymaking, media, civil society and social movements, poverty and inequality, terrorism and security, environmental governance, gender, and migration. Comparisons between developed and developing states made in order to enhance our understanding of the key themes.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2P31 strongly recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in POLI 2F30.
POLI 2P47
Rights Across Borders
Contemporary debate on meaning and implications of human rights as a political entitlement. Current issues in application, verification and enforcement of UN Covenants and related international conventions on human rights and collective rights, including rights of indigenous peoples. Structure, function and impact of regional, national and local human rights institutions in Canada and abroad.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 2P80
Political Analysis
Research methodologies and skills commonly used by political scientists. Topics include the evolution of political science, the ways in which empirical political research is carried out, advantages and limitations of the scientific approach in political analysis.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 2P91
Political Theory I
Ancient political philosophy, focusing on the theory and critique of Athenian democracy. May include texts by Homer, Thucydides, Plato, Aristotle, plays from Greek tragedy and comedy, and texts from Rome, Late Antiquity or the Middle Ages.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Note: strongly recommended that students take this course if they intend to take POLI 2P92.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 2P91.
POLI 2P92
Political Theory II
Modern political philosophy; may include the writings of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Kant, Wollstonecraft, Hegel, Tocqueville, Mill, Marx and Nietzsche.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: strongly recommended that students have taken POLI 2P91.
POLI 2P93
Political Theory of Contemporary Liberal Democracy
Twentieth- and 21st-century political thought, focusing on themes of contract and consent, rights and utility, identity and difference, and power and resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 2P97
The Government and Politics of the United States
American political system and the institutions of the federal government in the context of the constitutional separation of powers and the political party structure. Related topics include federalism, elections and voting behaviour, civil rights and selected public policy issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 2P99
Introduction to Canadian Public Policy
Major theories, approaches and concepts including the nature of public policy studies, contending theories of the state and public policy making, the growth of the state and the expansion of the scope of public policy activities, and alternative modes of state intervention.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR 2P99.
*POLI 2Q98
Introduction to Canadian Public Administration
(also offered as COMM 2Q98 and LABR 2Q98)
Political, legal and managerial dimensions of public administration. Topics include the structure and management of public organizations; government reform; political-bureaucratic relations; human resources and budgetary processes; ethics and accountability.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 1F90, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P02
Citizenship
Studies in citizenship, including classical and contemporary understandings.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P05
Canadian Political Thought
Selected works of 20th-century Canadian thinkers such as Harold Innis, Marshall McLuhan, Northrop Frye, George Grant, Charles Taylor and John Ralston Saul. Topics include the relationships among art and technology, politics and myth, culture and identity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P07
Democracy in the United States
Examines the attempt to devise, establish and preserve a new political order in the United States based on the principles of liberalism, through discussion of the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, the Federalist Papers, and selected judicial decisions. Crisis for that order posed by the Civil War. Analysis of that order by Tocqueville, George Grant and others.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P11
Local Government
Local government and politics in Canada with particular reference to Ontario. Topics include municipal organization, metropolitan and regional government, provincial-municipal-relations, elections, councils and councillors, citizen participation, property taxation and municipal finance, selected policy areas and theories of local government.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P12
Political Parties and Electoral Behaviour
Political party competition in Canada, party ideologies and ideas, election and party financing, election campaign techniques, voting behaviour, the electoral system and proposals for reform.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2F12 strongly recommended.
#POLI 3P13
The Politics of Labour
(also offered as LABR 3P13)
Critical, multidisciplinary, exploration of parliamentary and extra-parliamentary political activism in Canada's labour movement.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
*POLI 3P14
Indigenous Politics in Canada
(also offered as CANA 3P14)
Key historic and contemporary issues in Indigenous politics. Topics include settler-state relations, treaties, reconciliation, Indigenous governance, participation and resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2F12 strongly recommended.
POLI 3P15
Politics in Ontario
Major aspects of political life in Ontario, including province-building, voting behaviour, party systems, policy making and administrative apparatus.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*POLI 3P16
Politics in Qubec
(also offered as CANA 3P16)
Qubec's political, social and economic evolution since 1945. Topics include old and new varieties of nationalism, the Quiet Revolution, the changing roles of church and state, the decline of the Anglophone minority and Qubec's impact on Canadian federalism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, CANA 2P91, 2P92 (2F91) or permission of the instructor.
*POLI 3P17
Politics and the Mass Media in Canada
(also offered as COMM 3P17)
Canadian mass media and their relationship to the political process.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, COMM 2P50 (2F50) or permission of the instructor.
*POLI 3P18
Law and Politics
(also offered as CANA 3P18)
Canadian constitutional law emphasizing the protection of civil liberties both before and after the adoption of the Charter of Rights. Courts in both legal and political perspectives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2F12 strongly recommended.
POLI 3P21
Introduction to International Political Economy
Survey of theoretical perspectives and policy-related frameworks necessary to the study of the international political economy. Topics may include relations among production, finance and trade; role of transnational corporations and international economic institutions; politics of underdevelopment; emerging issues such as gender and work, the environment, new technologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P26
International Law and International Organization
International law and organization in the changing context of international politics. Activities and mechanisms of the United Nations, the International Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court. Tensions between law and power at the international level.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*POLI 3P28
Canadian Foreign Policy
(also offered as CANA 3P28)
Canadian foreign policy formulation, policy objectives and outcomes in a globalized context. Topics include the Canada-United States relationship, Canada's regional relations, and approaches to global cooperation across a range of global security, social and economic issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*POLI 3P33
The State and Economic Life
(also offered as LABR 3P33)
Ideological perspectives on the state-economy relationship; policy instruments including taxation, regulation and public ownership; alternative models of economic policy including socialism, Keynesianism and neo-liberalism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P43
Politics in the Developing World
Political institutions, processes and social movements in the developing world, including the role of international organizations and transnational corporations. Countries examined may be drawn from Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2P31 and 2P32 (2F30)  strongly recommended
POLI 3P46
Politics of Latin America
Survey of the governments and politics of selected Latin American states. Topics may include human insecurity, political institutions, democracy and authoritarianism, populism, revolutions and revolutionaries, social movements and protest, gender and ethnicity, human rights.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2P31 and 2P32 (2F30) strongly recommended.
POLI 3P66
Environmental Policy, Law and Administration
Development of the issue of pollution, including perceptions of the problem of different actors, public participation, governmental reactions and legislation, the implementation of potential solutions and international cooperation. Topics may include toxic wastes, acid rain, energy, the Great Lakes, risk assessment and ideologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TREN 3P66.
POLI 3P67
Advanced Issues in Canadian Public Policy
Contemporary Canadian public policy development.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of POLI 1P98, 2F12, 2P99, 2Q98 or permission of the instructor.
Note: specific fields will change from year to year.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR 3P67.
*POLI 3P71
Gender and Politics
(also offered as WGST 3P71)
Theoretical and practical issues in the relationships among gender, sex and politics, such as sexual equality and its nature and implications for public and private life.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
*POLI 3P72
Women in Politics
(also offered as WGST 3P72)
Women's participation and influence in the political institutions, processes and policies of modern states emphasizing contemporary Canada.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P91
Quantitative Political Analysis
Critically assessing public opinion polls in the news; statistical analyses of survey data using SPSS; describing and explaining political behaviour.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2P80.
Note: may be offered online
POLI 3P92
Qualitative Political Analysis
Selected qualitative techniques in research design and political analysis: interviewing and focus groups, content and document analysis, comparative and case study methods, direct observation, ethical issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2P80.
POLI 3P93
Politics and Technology
Assessing the relation between technology and politics, including considerations of evolving conceptions of citizenship, aesthetics and economics. Authors may include Marx, Heidegger, Foucault, Latour and Haraway.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of POLI 2P91, 2P92, 2P93.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 3P93.
POLI 3P94
European Politics
Survey of the governments and politics of selected European states and the European Union. Topics include political institutions, parties and elections, multi-level governance, EU-member state relations, and relations with the global community.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: POLI 2P31 and POLI 2P32 (2F30) strongly recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in POLI 3P44 and 3P45.
POLI 3P96
Global Indigenous Politics
Survey of Indigenous politics across the globe. Topics may include Indigenous peoples and nations in different regions around the world, transnational Indigenous organizing, and international Indigenous rights.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3P98
Public Sector Management
Management issues in public sector organizations, including budgeting, management of human and financial resources, ethics and values, and implementation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2Q98 or permission of the instructor.
POLI 3Q90
Animals, Sex and Power
Political behaviour among nonhuman animals, including collective decision-making, reproductive strategies, ethics and play. Introduction to methods derived from biology, game theory, primatology, biomimetics and animal studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#POLI 3Q93
Labour in a Global and Comparative Perspective
(also offered as LABR 3Q93)
Transnational issues such as global capitalism, the environment and nature, trade, migration and labour organizing, and national case studies from regions such as the global south, Europe and Asia.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, GEOG 1F90, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
#POLI 3Q95
Sex Work and Sex Workers
(also offered as LABR 3Q95, SOCI 3Q95 and WGST 3Q95)
Examination of sex work, various theoretical perspectives on sex work and their social policy implications for sex workers. Topics may include prostitution, pornography, the political economy of sex work and sex worker union organizing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
#POLI 3Q97
Public Sector Unions
(also offered as LABR 3Q97)
Multidisciplinary examination of public sector unionism in Canada. Topics include the origin and growth, collective bargaining and dispute resolution, privatization and contracting out, and public sector union political action.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Note: may be available on-site, online or blended.
POLI 4F99
Honours Thesis
Individual study and research under faculty supervision.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum 78 percent major average and approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: topics may come from any field in the discipline and may involve library research, field work and empirical analysis. Students must have a topic approved by the Chair and a faculty supervisor prior to registration.
POLI 4P01
The Philosophy of Law
Traditional and contemporary accounts of law and their implications for issues of contemporary concern.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 4P01.
POLI 4P02
Ancient Political Theory
Political theory of the ancient world, spanning texts from the Near East, Greece, Rome or China. Topics may include democracy, justice, power, tragedy, gender and ecology.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 4P02.
POLI 4P03
Modern Political Theory
Modern political theory examined in selected texts. Topics may include historicism, consent, progress, equality or a selected author such as Rousseau, Kant, Hegel.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 4P03.
POLI 4P04
Politics and Tyranny
Comparative accounts of ancient and modern tyranny examined in light of the question: has political domination varied significantly in the Western tradition.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 4P04.
POLI 4P07
Postmodern Political Theory
Perspectives on the postmodern condition in the works of selected 20th-century thinkers. Topics may include notions on the self, aesthetics and politics, reason and power, and the construction of meaning.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 4P07.
POLI 4P10
Issues in Local Government
Policy making and service delivery in local government including economic development, fire, parks, policing, public health, recreation and social services.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): POLI 3P11 or permission of the instructor.
#POLI 4P11
Critical Approaches to Applied Social Research Design
(also offered as SOCI 4P11)
Application of social science skills in community and public-sector settings, including various qualitative and quantitative research strategies to empower communities and inform social policy development. Includes evaluation of a community agency or social program of choice.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2P80, SOCI 2P11 or permission of the Sociology Department Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 4P11.
POLI 4P12
Citizen Politics
Citizen engagement in Canadian political parties, social movements, advocacy groups and voluntary organizations, and the impact of civic activism on public discourse, policies and laws.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2F12 or permission of the instructor.
Note: combines seminars with a mandatory service learning component.
POLI 4P14
Federalism in Canada
Canadian concepts of federalism, judicial interpretation of the constitutional distribution of powers, the social, economic and cultural factors that influence federal-provincial relations, issues in federal-provincial relations, the impact of federalism on public policy, and the politics of constitutional change.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: POLI 2F12 strongly recommended.
POLI 4P16
Global Migration: Canada in a Comparative Context
Global migration patterns, immigrant and refugee admission and integration policies, the trafficking of persons and smuggling, and the relation between migration and development.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2F12 or permission of the instructor.
Note: combines seminars with a mandatory experiential learning component. May be offered online.
POLI 4P17
Canadian Politics in the Digital Age
Impact of digital technology and innovation on political institutions in Canada. Implications of these changes for democracy.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum of 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2F12 or permission of the instructor.
Note: combines seminars with a mandatory experiential learning component.
POLI 4P19
The Canadian Judicial Process
The structure, functions, and political dimension of the judiciary in Canada. Topics may include judicial decision-making, appointment and independence; the policy impact of judicial rulings; the criminal process; the influence of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms on the judicial system; and the players in the judicial process, including judges, interest groups and governments.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: POLI 2F12 strongly recommended.
POLI 4P20
Globalization and Global Governance
Globalization of national politics and the reconstruction of politics at a global level. Topics may include policy problems linked to the effectiveness of international and national institutions; theoretical considerations on new concepts of politics and democracy in the globalized world.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
POLI 4P21
The Global Digital Political Economy
Intersection between economics and politics, emphasizing understanding how issues such as data governance, intellectual property and internet governance are shaping global economic governance, trade and development.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
POLI 4P22
Canada and the Developing World
Canada's role in addressing global inequality in a comparative context. Topics may include political economy of Canadian policies towards the developing world; international ethics; international co-operation on issues of vital interest to the developing world.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
POLI 4P24
Private Global Governance
The role of private, non-state actors in global governance. Interactions between global corporations, voluntary standards associations, non-governmental organizations, states and industry associations and the influences that drive global private governance arrangements and global standard setting. Global human rights, environmental protection and corporate social responsibility in industrial sectors.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
POLI 4P26
International Politics and National Security
Conditions affecting the use of force in the post-Cold War international system. Basis of state security, the nature of threats and regional conflicts.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
POLI 4P27
Theories of International Relations
International relations theory emphasizing the nature of the international system and its relationship to the choices and actions of individual states.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
POLI 4P34
Comparative Judicial Systems
Global expansion of judicial power and the role of courts in democratization, rights protection, political centralization, and resolving societal conflict. Domestic as well as supranational courts from around the world are considered, representing both common law and civil law systems. Topics include the success and failure of the rights revolutions, the judicialization of politics, court reform, and justifications for judicial review.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: POLI 2P31 and POLI 2P32 (2F30) strongly recommended.
POLI 4P36
Comparative Democratization in a Global Age: Reform, Revolution and Reversal
Analysis of the origins, processes, and outcomes of democratization and de-democratization in countries around the world.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: POLI 2P31 and POLI 2P32 (2F30) strongly recommended.
POLI 4P38
Nationalism and Ethnic Politics
Theory and case studies of the origins and resolution of national conflict, the mobilization of ethnic groups and the role of international forces in what have been viewed traditionally as domestic conflicts. Case studies situate Canada's ethnic tensions within a broader comparative perspective.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: POLI 2P31 and POLI 2P32 (2F30) strongly recommended.
#POLI 4P41
Labour Law and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms
(also offered as LABR 4P41)
Application of Charter rights and freedoms, notably expression and association, to labour law in Canada.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and LABR (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Note: POLI 2F12 recommended for Political Science majors.
POLI 4P50
Machinery of Government
Structures and processes of federal and provincial government in Canada. Emphasis on the operation of government departments, central agencies, regulatory agencies and crown corporations.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and INPE majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): POLI 2Q98 or permission of the instructor.
*POLI 4P54
Business-Government Relations
(also offered as LABR 4P54)
Politics and management of relations between business organizations and governments in Canada emphasizing current research and issues. Topics include theories of business-government relations, the legislative and regulatory environment of business, public enterprise and privatization, lobbying, and interaction among government, business, media and labour.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined), INPE and LABR (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: open to non-POLS majors with relevant background in other disciplines and permission of the instructor.
POLI 4P67
Comparative Public Policy
Major concepts, theoretical approaches and issues in Comparative Public Policy, assessing the various frameworks used for understanding and addressing public policy issues in different countries and regions. Cases from Canada, the United States, Europe and the developing world.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of POLI 2F12, 2P99, 2Q98, 3P67 or permission of the instructor.
#POLI 4P68
Social Movements and Globalization
(also offered as SOCI 4P68)
Restructuring of social movements from around the world in new alliances for global justice. Topics may include relations between local and global scales, cross-cultural collaborations, tensions between unity and diversity, conflicts and unequal power relations in networks and North-South inequalities. May include indigenous movements, transnational feminism, the anti-corporate globalizations movement and environmentalism.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 4P68.
POLI 4P70
Tutorial in Political Theory
Guided reading on an aspect of political theory not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. Further information is available from the Undergraduate Program Advisor.
POLI 4P71
Tutorial in Canadian Politics
Guided reading on an aspect of Canadian politics not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. Further information is available from the Undergraduate Program Advisor.
POLI 4P72
Tutorial in International Relations
Guided reading on an aspect of international relations not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. Further information is available from the Undergraduate Program Advisor.
POLI 4P73
Tutorial in Comparative Politics
Guided reading on an aspect of comparative politics not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. Further information is available from the Undergraduate Program Advisor.
POLI 4P74
Tutorial in Public Administration
Guided reading on an aspect of public administration not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. Further information is available from the Undergraduate Program Advisor.
POLI 4P75
Tutorial in Public Policy
Guided reading on an aspect of public policy not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. Further information is available from the Undergraduate Program Advisor.
POLI 4P76
Tutorial in Political Science
Guided reading on an aspect of political science not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. Further information is available from the Undergraduate Program Advisor.
POLI 4P95
Political Science Internship
Part-time internship in a government agency, political party, research institute, relevant non-governmental organization (NGO) or other approved placement.
Internship placement time, minimum 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single) and INPE majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Note: enrolment limited to number of placements available up to a maximum of 15 students. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the internship experience within a theoretical context.
POLI 4V80-4V89
Special topics in Political Science
POLI 4V80
2021-2022: Special Topics in Indigenous Politics
Indigenous politics, contemporary and/or historical colonialism and relationships between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS (single or combined) majors with either a minimum of 14.0 overall credits and a minimum 70 percent major average or approval to year 4 (honours).
CO-OP COURSES
POLI 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to POLS Co-op students.
POLI 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to POLS Co-op students.
POLI 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to POLS Co-op students.
POLI 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentation, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to POLS Co-op students.
POLI 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to POLS Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): POLI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): POLI 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
POLI 2C02
Co-op reflective Learning and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to POLS Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): POLI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): POLI 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
POLI 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to POLS Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): POLI 0N90.
Corequisite(s): POLI 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Claire Gallop
Administrative Assistant
905-688-5550, extension 3476
Plaza 328
brocku.ca/social-sciences/departments-and-centres/political-science
political.science@brocku.ca
Politics affects everyone. It is through politics that the future of the world we inhabit is shaped. Aristotle called politics the master science because he recognized how wide and pervasive politics is. The interests of political scientists are diverse. They include conflict at city hall or in the courtroom; the arguments and processes through which our national existence might be preserved; the collapse of Communism and the struggle to establish new political arrangements in its place; the role of pressure groups in shaping public policy; electoral reform; the control of civil servants; the rule of law among nations; the place of moral principle and national interest in the conduct of foreign policy; or how far any citizen might have the right or duty to disobey an unjust law. Political Science offers us the opportunity to become freer human beings and citizens because, whatever the subject of our immediate inquiry, the focus is always upon the ideas, institutions and processes that shape our lives.
The BA Honours program provides students with the opportunity for a more intensive examination of issues in the field.
Political Science may be combined at the Honours or Pass level with other disciplines, the choice depending upon the student's interests and capabilities. As well, it is possible, within the departmental offerings, to arrange a thematic program of study around a selection of courses built to suit the student's particular interests.
All students in Political Science especially those proceeding to graduate studies or to a career in the public service, are encouraged to become proficient in a language other than English, normally French. Students who develop interests in a particular geographical area are urged to select related courses in history, language and literature. Questions about the Political Science program should be directed to the Undergraduate Advisor.
Political Science Co-operative (Co-op)
The Political Science Co-op program combines academic and work terms over a four and one-half year period. Students spend two years in an academic setting doing course work prior to taking the first work term. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, Political Science Co-op students are assessed an annual administration fee (see Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue is based on the students major average and non-major average. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average will be permitted to continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Political Science Co-op program. If a student subsequently raises their major average to 70 percent, the student may be readmitted to the Co-op program only if approved by the Co-op Education Office in consultation with the Department.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Education Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Education Office.
The Political Science Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have honours standing and who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience.
Students whose primary interest is in public administration as a field of study, or as a potential career are advised to consider the Co-op program in public administration, outlined below. This program leads to a BA (Honours) Political Science.
Public Administration Co-operative (Co-op)
Public administration is the study of the political, legal and managerial dimensions of the public sector. Designed to equip students with the necessary skills, knowledge and practical experience to provide them with a competitive edge in seeking employment in the Federal, Provincial or Municipal levels of government, the Public Administration Co-op program combines academic and work terms over a four and one-half year period. Students spend two and one-half years in an academic setting studying political science with a specialization in public administration and public policy prior to their first work term. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, co-op students are assessed an annual administration fee (see Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue is based on the student's major average and non-major average. A student with a minimum 70 per cent major average and a minimum 60 per cent non-major average will be permitted to continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Public Administration Co-op program. If a student subsequently raises their major average to 70 percent, the student may be readmitted to the Co-op program only if approved by the Co-op Education Office in consultation with the Department.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manuals (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student-manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Education Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Education Office.
The Public Administration Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have honours standing and who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience. This program leads to a BA (Honours) Political Science.
Paralegal-Seneca College
The Paralegal program involves courses offered through Brock University and Seneca College. Paralegals are legally qualified to offer specified legal services directly to the public for a fee without the supervision of a lawyer. The Seneca program is designed to provide students with an understanding of general law principles, legal ethics, small business practices, and other legal subjects. Students are also required to complete a field placement at the end of their year at Seneca. Students who successfully complete the requirements for this program will be granted a Bachelor of Arts (Honours) Political Science degree from Brock and a Paralegal diploma from Seneca College. Gaining both a degree and this diploma would ordinarily involve attending college after gaining a university degree, but the Brock and Seneca program combines the two in a single integrated package that can be completed in four years. Applicants must have a minimum 70 percent overall average to be considered for admission to the program. Volunteering experience is considered an asset. Successful applicants must maintain a minimum 70 percent overall average during Year 2 and meet other program requirements to continue in the program. Enrolment in this program is limited. Admission to the program is not guaranteed by attainment of the minimum requirements.
Policing and Criminal Justice-Niagara College
The Policing and Criminal Justice program is closed to year 1 and 2.
Please consult the Policing and Criminal Justice entry for a listing of program requirements.
Political Science and Labour Studies-George Brown College
This Political Science and Labour Studies program involves courses offered through Brock University and George Brown College. This four-year program combines courses and training in applied labour studies settings at George Brown College with a degree at Brock. The program caters to individuals who wish to have a career in a wide variety of areas including unionized environments, occupational health and safety, politics, or human resources. The program allows students to gain both solid applied skills in these areas, and a strong theoretical knowledge about a variety of these topics. Students who successfully complete the requirements for this program will be granted both a Bachelor of Arts (Honours) Political Science and Labour Studies degree from Brock, and two certificates from George Brown College 1) a certificate in Contemporary Labour Perspectives from the George Brown School of Labour and 2) a Post-Graduate Certificate in Human Resources Management. Gaining both a degree and these certificates would ordinarily involve attending college after gaining a university degree, but the Brock and George Brown program combines the two in a single integrated package that can be completed in four years. Applicants must have a minimum 70 percent overall average to be considered for admission to the program. Volunteering experience is considered an asset. Successful applicants must maintain a minimum 70 percent overall average during Year 2 and meet other program requirements to continue in the program. Enrolment in this program is limited. Admission to the program is not guaranteed by attainment of the minimum requirements.
Please consult the Labour Studies entry for a listing of program requirements.

72

Popular Culture Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
POPULAR CULTURE COURSES
PCUL 1F92
Introduction to Popular Culture
Historical, ethnographic and textual approaches to the study of cultures and practices of everyday life.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
#PCUL 1P00
Music in Popular Culture I
(also offered as MUSI 1P00)
Survey of developments in the music industry and styles of blues, country, jazz, and rock up to the 1960s.
Lectures, 3 hours per week: listening assignments.
Note: major credit will not be granted to Music majors. Online. Concert fee may be required. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL (MUSI) 1F00.
#PCUL 1P01
Music in Popular Culture II
(also offered as MUSI 1P01)
Survey of developments in rock, jazz, pop, and related musical styles from the 1960s to present.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; listening assignments.
Note: major credit will not be granted for MUSI majors. Online. Concert fee may be required. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL (MUSI) 1F00.
#PCUL 2F00
New Media Literacy
(also offered as COMM 2F00 and FILM 2F00)
Practical training in a repertoire of skills and tools essential to functioning in new media environments, and critical analytical training in key issues and theories related to the contemporary information age.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: this course is offered online.
#PCUL 2P06
Cultural and Historical Geography
(also offered as GEOG 2P06)
Interactions among culture, society, and landscape. Material and symbolic manifestations of culture in processes of landscape change.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, GEOG 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TOUR 2P06.
#PCUL 2P15
Research Methods in Communication and Culture
(also offered as COMM 2P15)
Introduction to qualitative and quantitative methods for communication and popular culture research.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 2P18
Reporting and News Writing for Mass Media
(also offered as COMM 2P18 and WRDS 2P18)
News gathering, writing and editing for print and electronic media; journalistic style and conventions; interviewing and other information-gathering techniques; editing basics.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, WRDS (single of combined) majors, RWRT and WRDS minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P18.
*PCUL 2P20
Theories of Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 2P20 and FILM 2P20)
Theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of various forms of popular culture. Critical and research skills specific to studies in popular culture.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN majors, PCUL, DCUL and MEST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, CANA 1F91, COMM 1F90,CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94 or permission of the instructor.
*PCUL 2P21
Canadian Popular Culture
(also offered as CANA 2P21, COMM 2P21 and FILM 2P21)
Survey of the media in Canada. Studies in the popular arts, referencing the ways that institutions (CBC, NFB) and selected artists identify and express a Canadian cultural imagination.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, CANA, COMM, FILM (single or combined) and MCMN majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PCUL, CANA, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
#PCUL 2P26
The Information Society
(also offered as COMM 2P26)
Concepts such as surveillance, social sorting and control within our networked lives. Historic precursors to computing as well as contemporary and emerging technologies from our everyday lives.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, IASC, MCMN majors and DCUL, MEST minors until date specified in the Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 2P56
Canadian Cinema
(also offered as COMM 2P56 and FILM 2P56)
Critical and historical study of Canadian cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 2P63
Communication Design
(also offered as COMM 2P63 and WRDS 2P63)
Communication through imagery and typography, including grid usage, composition, visual hierarchy, content development and scale.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, WRDS (WRIT) 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 2P63.
*PCUL 2P70
Popular Music and Society
(also offered as COMM 2P70, MUSI 2P70 and SOCI 2P70)
Critical approaches to popular music in its social, cultural, political and economic contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, MUSI (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, MUSI (single or combined), SOCI (single or combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students, PCUL and MEST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F00, 1F92, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, MUSI 1F50, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 2P71
Popular Arts in the Modern Middle East
(also offered as COMM 2P71 and HIST 2P71)
Middle Eastern popular culture and art from historical perspectives. Influence and role of internet, music, cinema and theater, paintings, sports, foods and fashion in the daily life of people in the Middle East and their historical transformations through modernization and globalization. Role of class, gender, economy and politics shaped and reshaped the artistic representations and popular culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#PCUL 2P91
Social Media
(also offered as COMM 2P91 and IASC 2P91)
Theory, philosophy and politics of Social Media as a communicative mode. Politics of participatory and commodified culture online and the processes of planning content to convey a narrative or convene a community.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, GAMD, IASC, MCMN majors DCUL, MEST minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 2P92
Hip Hop and the Urban Working Class
(also offered as COMM 2P92 and LABR 2P92)
Global urban working class life through the lens of hip hop culture. Topics may include the impact of neoliberal globalization, precarious work, the informal economy, and the ways in which race, class and gender shape experiences of social and economic life in the global city.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LABR 2P91.
*PCUL 2P93
Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 2P93, ENGL 2P93 and FILM 2P93)
Analysis of storytelling across different media such as novels, film, television, the Internet and video games.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), FILM (single or combined), MCMN and WRDS (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, ENGL 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, FILM 1F94 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 2P94
Popular Cinema
(also offered as COMM 2P94 and FILM 2P94)
Popular cinema as art and institution emphasizing film genres and cultural contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94.
#PCUL 2P98
Media Industries
(also offered as COMM 2P98 and SOCI 2P98)
Canadian media production in its economic, political and technological environments.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single and combined), SOCI (single and combined) majors, DCUL, MEST, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, SOCI 1F90.
*PCUL 2Q91
Ethnography and Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 2Q91)
Ethnographic approaches to the study of folk culture and popular entertainment, past and present.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, CPCF 1F25, FILM 1F94.
#PCUL 2Q96
Art of Activism: Sexuality to Racial Justice
(also offered as COMM 2Q96, FILM 2Q96, VISA 2Q96 and WGST 2Q96)
Introduction to the ways marginalized and criminalized populations employ the arts of social change. Topics may include feminist activism, migrant rights, defunding the police and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Artists, film makers and activists in Canada will be featured.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
PCUL 3P01
Directed Reading
Tutorial combined with one or more research papers or projects in an area of Popular Culture Studies of mutual interest to the student and instructor.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member in consultation with the Academic Adviser and must submit a written contract signed by the faculty member to the Undergraduate Program Adviser before registration.
*PCUL 3P03
Advanced Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 3P03, ENGL 3P03 and FILM 3P03)
Case studies in adaptation of popular texts across media.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), FILM (single or combined), MCMN and WRDS (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P93.
#PCUL 3P06
Class and Culture
(also offered as LABR 3P06 and SOCI 3P06)
Intersectional and critical analysis of the cultural politics of class. Topics may include class experience and consciousness, class and labour in popular culture, the influence of class and culture on society, and cultures of resistance.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to students with a minimum 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 2P20, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#PCUL 3P15
Media Analysis
(also offered as COMM 3P15)
Introduction to methods of media analysis. Comparison of theoretical and methodological approaches to mediated content, production, consumption, and reception.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P15.
#PCUL 3P18
Audience Studies
(also offered as COMM 3P18 and FILM 3P18)
Theoretical and methodological approaches to the understanding of audiences for media and cultural products, including print, sound, film, broadcasting and digital media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20.
#PCUL 3P19
Communication and Media Policy
(also offered as COMM 3P19)
Historical trends in objectives and implementation of communication policies. Topics include broadcasting, subsidies, protection, regulation and effect of international trade on domestic media policy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors, DCUL and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P98.
Completion of this course will replace credit and grade previously obtained in PCUL (COMM) 2P17.
#PCUL 3P20
Television Studies
(also offered as COMM 3P20 and FILM 3P20)
Historical, theoretical and critical approaches to television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN, STAC majors and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3P21
Canadian Television
(also offered as COMM 3P21 and FILM 3P21)
Historical, theoretical and critical approaches to Canadian television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN, STAC majors and PCUL minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 3P20 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3P22
Media and Sport
(also offered as COMM 3P22 and SPMA 3P22)
Relations between sport organizations, the mass media and popular culture. Topics may included the commodification of sport, media rights, sponsorship, fan cultures, and the representation of sports in journalism and popular entertainment.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P98, SPMA 2P65 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL (COMM/SPMA) 2P22.
#PCUL 3P26
Social and Cultural Aspects of Digital Gaming
(also offered as COMM 3P26 and IASC 3P26)
Critical investigation of digital gaming, particularly of the interrelationships among past and present games, culture, and media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20, or IASC 1P04 and 1P05.
#PCUL 3P55
Advertising in Context
(also offered as COMM 3P55)
Methodological and critical approaches to contemporary advertising in its cultural, social and political-economic contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors, PCUL and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission ot the instructor.
#PCUL 3P63
Digital Design and Communication
(also offered as COMM 3P63 and WRDS 3P63)
Introduction to digital design focusing on visual communication by using Adobe software and the Macintosh computer.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, WRDS (single or combined) majors, RWRT and WRDS minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P63.
*PCUL 3P73
Popular Music and Youth Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P73, MUSI 3P73 and SOCI 3P73)
Cultural relation between young people and popular music. Topics include music's role in the formation of identity, the connection between musical taste and various forms of youth fashion or style, and the impact of new technologies on the ways in which young people access music.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P70 or permission of the instructor.
*PCUL 3P75
Cultures of Consumption
(also offered as COMM 3P75)
Commodities within social life. Topics may include digital consumerism, value creation, modes of exchange, shopping spaces, fashion cycles, consumer identity, status formation, lifestyle construction and ethical consumption debates.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20.
#PCUL 3P92
Technology and Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P92 and IASC 3P92)
Critical analysis of the ways in which culture and technology are mutually productive of one another using historical, contemporary and emerging examples drawn from everyday life.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 2P26, 2P91, COMM 2P90 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3P93
Indigenous People in Media and Popular Culture
(also offered as CANA 3P93, COMM 3P93 and SOCI 3P93)
Historical and contemporary representations of Indigenous people in mainstream media and popular culture. Indigenous interventions in production of cultural content and media structures.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, CANA, COMM, MCMN, SOCI (single or combined) majors and MEST minors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): CANA 1F91, COMM 1F90, SOCI 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3P94
Film Genre
(also offered as COMM 3P94 and FILM 3P94)
Genre theory, its history, development and application to cinema.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
*PCUL 3P96
Issues in Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 3P96 and FILM 3P96)
Specialized studies in popular culture, and its role in specific social, historical or theoretical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 and 2P21 or FILM 2P90 (2F90).
#PCUL 3P97
Gender and Cinema to the 1960s
(also offered as COMM 3P97, FILM 3P97 and WGST 3P97)
Representation of gender, sexuality, race and class, and implications of spectatorship and ideology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90), one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3P98
Gender and Contemporary Cinema
(also offered as COMM 3P98, FILM 3P98 and WGST 3P98)
Representation of gender, sexuality, race and class via ideology, feminism, queer theory, and spectatorship in film and video texts since the 1960s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90), one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3Q90
Indigenous Cultural Production and Activism
(also offered as COMM 3Q90, DART 3Q90, INDG 3Q90, PCUL 3Q90, SOCI 3Q90 and WGST 3Q90)
Draws on cultural, experiential and theoretical texts to better understand Indigenous epistemologies. Examples include ImagineNative and community arts projects.
Lectures, fieldwork, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of PCUL 1F92, COMM 1F90, one INDG (ABST) credit, SOCI 1F90, WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*PCUL 3Q91
The History and Culture of Role-Playing Games
(also offered as COMM 3Q91)
Tabletop gaming culture from the 1970s to the 2000s. Topics may include realism versus fantasy, moral panics and nostalgia.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 or CPCF 1F25.
Note: labs introduce basic game design.
*PCUL 3Q92
Food and Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 3Q92)
Studies of food in media and everyday life. Topics may include food on screens and in print; celebrity chefs; food and meaning making; cooking and domestic sphere; culture and table manners; taste; political economy of food; contemporary food rituals; dietary subcultures.
Lectures seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3Q94
Television Genres
(also offered as COMM 3Q94 and FILM 3Q94)
Genre theory and its application to popular television.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 and 2P21, FILM 2P90 (2F90) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3Q97
Events Management
(also offered as COMM 3Q97 and TOUR 3Q97)
Introduction to events management. Topics include event types and contexts; conceptualization, planning and design; marketing and sponsorship; budgeting and financial management; managing human and volunteer resources; staging and logistics; risk management, evaluation and sustainability.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined), TMGT and TREN majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 or TOUR 2P31.
#PCUL 3Q98
The Psychology of Screens (Television and Beyond)
(also offered as COMM 3Q98, IASC 3Q98 and PSYC 3Q98)
Cognitive responses to mediated communication including television and new/emerging information and communication technologies. Focus on cognitive effects, theories and research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of COMM 1F90, IASC 1F01, IASC 1P04 and 1P05, PSYC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL (COMM/PSYC) 3P95 and COMM 3Q20.
#PCUL 3R90
Sound & Vision: The Rockumentary
(also offered as COMM 3R90 and FILM 3R90)
Intersection of the music and film industries through an in-depth study of the popular music documentary (rockumentary), its history and its contexts.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): FILM 1F94 and one of PCUL 2P20, 2P70, FILM 2P54.
PCUL 3V50-3V59
Special Topics in Popular Culture Studies
Topics selected on basis of instructional expertise and student interest.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 and 2P21, or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 3V50
2021-2022: Applied Projects in Communication
(also offered as COMM 3V50)
Application of small group communication and problem-solving tools to projects with community partners. Topics may include strategies for small group communication and leadership, problem analysis and project planning in the workplace, and career preparation for communication and creative industries.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, PCUL and PCLN majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
PCUL 3V90-3V99
Advanced Topics in Popular Culture Studies
Topics selected on the basis of instructional expertise and student interest.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P20 or permission of the instructor.
*PCUL 3V90
2021-2022: The Superhero in American Culture
(also offered as COMM 3V90 and FILM 3V90)
The superhero as a cultural symbol. Topics include historical contexts, theories of genre and issues of representation. Examples drawn from comic books, cartoons, television shows and films from the mid-1930s to the present.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 5 hours per week.
PCUL 4F99
Honours Thesis
Thesis on a topic of mutual interest to the student and the instructor, with a critical, historical or contemporary focus.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 78 percent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 4P30 and 4P31 (may be taken concurrently).
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member, in consultation with the Academic Adviser and must submit a written proposal before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's PCUL 4P80 directed reading.
*PCUL 4P03
Applied Studies in Popular Narrative
(also offered as COMM 4P03, ENGL 4P03 and FILM 4P03)
Practical, historical and theoretical approaches to popular narratives.
Lectures, screening, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, ENCW (single or combined), ENGL (single or combined), ENGL (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), FILM (single or combined), MCMN and WRDS (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 3P03.
*PCUL 4P06
Advanced Studies in Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 4P06 and FILM 4P06)
Issues in popular culture and its role in specific social, historical and theoretical contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus weekly screening.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 3P96.
#PCUL 4P14
Advanced Research in Cultural Industries
(also offered as COMM 4P14)
Advanced research into the national and international development, operations and political economy of a single cultural industry. Topics may include press, periodicals, radio, music, film, television or interactive media industries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors and MEST minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 4P18
Media and the Natural Environment
(also offered as COMM 4P18)
Media constructions of the natural environment, environmental movements and environmental issues such as pollution, climate change and consumerism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors and MEST minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
*PCUL 4P23
Research on Media and Popular Culture
(also offered as COMM 4P23 and SOCI 4P23)
Advanced research seminar on the relations between mass media and popular culture.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, SOCI (single or combined) majors, MEST, CRAS and SOCI minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 2P98 (3P14) or 3P15.
*PCUL 4P30
Theories of Mass Culture
(also offered as COMM 4P30 and FILM 4P30)
Studies in cultural theory and its application to mass media texts, referencing the work of the Frankfurt School, French Structuralism and British Cultural Studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined), MCMN majors, DCUL and MEST minors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 4P31
Theories of the Visible
(also offered as COMM 4P31 and FILM 4P31)
Central 20th-century developments in theories of visibility and their relevance to the field of media studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined) and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
*PCUL 4P34
Taste and Cultural Politics
(also offered as COMM 4P34 and FILM 4P34)
Application of cultural theories to the analysis of taste, distinction, class, cultural standards and moral panics, transgression and trash culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined) and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
PCUL 4P40
Popular Culture and Identity
Theoretical and methodological approaches to analysis of identity in popular culture. Topics may include class, gender, locality, ethnicity, and nationality.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 4P55
History of Advertising
(also offered as COMM 4P55)
Historical research into the development of Canadian advertising practices in an international context. Evaluation of the cultural and economic impact of advertising on the mass media and the role of advertising in the formation of a consumer culture.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 4P58
Ecocinema: History, Theory and Practice
(also offered as COMM 4P58 and FILM 4P58)
Topics may include climate change, species degradation/extinction, resource extraction and other industrial practices (including hydrocarbonized film industrial practices), forced migration, slow violence and eco-trauma, as well as questions of scale, magnitude and the sublime in nature.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN and FILM (single and combined) with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Note: completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL (COMM/FILM) 4V58.
#PCUL 4P59
Writing Cultural Criticism for the Media
(also offered as COMM 4P59 and FILM 4P59)
Skills and techniques for reviewing contemporary media culture for publication.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, and FILM (single and combined) with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
Note: weekly writing assignments discussed in a workshop setting.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL (COMM/FILM) 4V59.
#PCUL 4P61
Conventions of Screen Realism
(also offered as COMM 4P61 and FILM 4P61)
How representation and perception of reality have evolved with technology and aesthetics, from the Lumires to reality television.
Lectures, seminar, screening, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL, BCMN, COMM, FILM (single or combined) and MCMN majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
PCUL 4P80
Directed Reading
Directed individual or group readings in an area of popular culture.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with a minimum of 14.0 credits, a minimum 75 percent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: students are responsible for arranging their course with a faculty member, in consultation with the Academic Adviser and must submit a written proposal, signed by the Undergraduate Program Adviser before registration. The reading may not be on the topic or with the faculty member of the student's PCUL 4F99 thesis.
PCUL 4V50-4V59
Contemporary Issues in Popular Culture Studies
Special topics in contemporary popular culture research.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
#PCUL 4V57
2021-2022: Visual Culture
(also offered as COMM 4V57 and FILM 4V57)
Survey of selected practices and phenomena related to the visuality in media and culture. Primary focus is on the role of visuality in the production of knowledge and power relations. Topics may include: scientific visualization, themed environments, photographic cultures, museums, and cartography.
Lecture, Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
PCUL 4V60-4V69
Historical Perspectives in Popular Culture
Specialized studies in popular culture addressing specific forms, genres or issues in a particular historical period.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
PCUL 4V70-4V79
Issues in International Popular Culture
Specialized studies of popular culture in international or global contexts.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with approval to year 4 (honours) or permission of the instructor.
INTERNSHIP COURSES
PCUL 4F00
Internship in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 160 hour placement.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement experience within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL 4P00, 4P01, COMM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, FILM 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
PCUL 4P00
Placement in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 80 hour placement.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL 4F00, COMM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, FILM 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
PCUL 4P01
Placement in Communication, Popular Culture or Film
Part-time placement related to communication, popular culture or film in a company, agency or not-for-profit organization. Students are responsible for arranging their own placements in consultation with the department Academic Adviser and Internship Co-ordinator.
Tutorial, regularly scheduled meetings, 80 hour placement.
Restriction: open to PCUL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PCUL 4P00.
Note: enrolment is limited. Students will be required to complete a major paper setting the placement within a theoretical context.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PCUL 4F00, COMM 4F00, 4P00, 4P01, FILM 4F00, 4P00 and 4P01.
This program is offered through the Department of Communication, Popular Culture and Film
Chair
Sarah Matheson
Academic Administrator
Penni Lafleur
Academic Advisor/Experiential Learning Co-ordinator
Anneka Bosse

73

Psychology
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
PSYCHOLOGY COURSES
PSYC 1F90
Foundations of Psychology
Methodological approaches and contemporary issues in psychology and their application to everyday life.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: prerequisite to all courses in Psychology except PSYC 2F23 and 3Q91.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 1F25 and 1P28.
PSYC 2F23
Statistics and Research Design in the Behavioural Sciences
Principles of research design and data analysis in the context of psychological research.
Lectures, tutorial, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 or one Social Science credit.
Note: 4U Mathematics of Data Management or equivalent background recommended.
PSYC 2P01
Roadmap to Careers in Psychology
Career exploration and applications in psychology and related fields.
Seminar, online activities, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single) majors. Not open to combined majors and minors.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: students are expected to register during their second year of study. Must be completed before registering in required year 4 courses.
PSYC 2P12
Lifespan Development
Introduction to theories and research in human development across the lifespan. Topics include development in physical, perceptual, cognitive, linguistic, social and/or emotional domains.
Lectures, 1.5 hours per week; online activities, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR, RECL, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: students may not concurrently register in CHYS 2P10.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CHYS 2F05 and 2P10.
PSYC 2P15
Abnormal Psychology
Mental disorders with respect to classification, diagnosis, etiology, treatment, and applied case studies. Biological and psychosocial risk factors for mental disorders.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 3F20 and 3P28.
PSYC 2P20
Cognition
How the mind processes information. Topics include recognition, attention, memory, problem solving, judgment and decision making.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site or online.
PSYC 2P25
Personality and Individual Differences
Introduction to theory and research in personality and related individual differences. Topics include measurement and structure of personality characteristics; biological bases, genetic and environmental origins, and evolutionary function of personality; personality disorders; personality as a predictor of life outcomes; other domains of psychological variation (religious beliefs and political attitudes, sexuality, occupational interests, mental abilities).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 2P30
Fundamentals of Social Psychology
Theory, methods and research examining the influence of others on phenomena such as cognition, the self, attitudes, group processes and communication.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until dates specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 2P35
Introduction to Brain and Behaviour
Introduction to biological aspects of behavioural neuroscience. Basics of the structure and function of the nervous system in relation to behaviour and reviews activities of the brain from the neuron through to interrelationships among neural systems. Topics include neuronal function, drugs and behaviour, brain plasticity and recovery from injury, sensation and perception, and the organization of the brain emphasizing human behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; seminar, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: student may not concurrently register in PSYC (NEUR) 2P36.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC (NEUR) 2P36.
*PSYC 2P36
Brain and Behaviour I
(also offered as NEUR 2P36)
Introduction to behavioural neuroscience and biological aspects of behaviour. Basics of the structure and function of the nervous system in relation to behaviour and activities of the brain from the neuron through to interrelationships among neural systems (central and peripheral nervous system, and hormonal regulation). Topics include neuronal function, drugs and behaviour, brain plasticity and recovery from injury, sensation and perception, and the organization of the brain emphasizing human behaviour.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: materials fee required. Students may not concurrently register in PSYC 2P35.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 2P35.
*PSYC 2P37
Brain and Behaviour II
(also offered as NEUR 2P37)
Physiological basis of neural mechanisms relevant to human actions and cognitions such as motivation (sleep, sexual behaviour, eating), emotions and stress, learning and memory, communication and language, and thought (psychological/psychiatric disorders).
Lectures, 3 hours per week; lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P35 or 2P36.
PSYC 2P49
Perception
Introduction to human perception emphasizing visual and auditory perception, including theory and applications to neurophysiology, speech recognition and development. Integration of smell, taste, balance and time perception to demonstrate the biological and cognitive bases of perception.
Lectures, 2.5 hours per week, seminar, 1 hour, alternating weeks.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
#PSYC 2P95
Sport Psychology
(also offered as KINE 2P95)
Interaction between psychology and behaviour in sport. Understanding individual and team optimal performance and athlete development.
lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) BSc (Kin) majors and PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration Guide. Students must have a minimum of 3.5 overall credits.
PSYC 3F01
Facilitating Communication and Critical Thinking in Groups
Examination of theories and concepts related to the successful facilitation of groups. Topics may include the promotion of critical thinking and effective communication, group-based learning, intergroup dynamics and conflict resolution.
Lectures, seminar, 5 hours per week; group-based facilitation, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits, 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90 and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2F23.
PSYC 3F40
Psychological Research
Research methods emphasizing correlational and experimental designs and associated analyses (regression and ANOVA). Development of the student's capacity to evaluate scientific literature, generate testable hypotheses, gather and analyze data and report results in a manuscript.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors with a minimum 77 percent major average and a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2F23.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 3P39.
Note: Neuroscience majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum of 8.0 overall credits may register. Contact the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 3P30.
PSYC 3P05
Visual Perception From Eye to Brain
Historical and contemporary issues in the cognitive neuroscience of visual perception. Different approaches to perception, emphasizing neuroimaging and neuropsychology. Topics may include face and object perception, emotion, short and long-term memory, and neural correlates of consciousness.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors, GHUM, SOSC students and minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; one of PSYC 2P35, 2P36, 2P20, 2P49.
*PSYC 3P06
Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience
(also offered as NEUR 3P06)
Neural basis of human cognition, emphasizing contemporary methods in cognitive neuroscience. Methodology (e.g. neuroimaging), perception, memory, language, emotion, executive functions and social cognition.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 1.0 PSYC credit above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P35 or PSYC 2P36; one of PSYC 2P20,  2P49 or permission of the instructor.
#PSYC 3P11
Theories of Development and Socialization
(also offered as CHYS 3P11)
Interdisciplinary exploration of child and youth development and socialization, including the foundational literature in psychology, sociology and anthropology, as well as contemporary and critical interpretive theories of childhood and youth.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors and CHYS minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors, GHUM, SOSC students and CHYS minors. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90 or permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P12 or CHYS 2P10.
PSYC 3P18
Adolescent Development
Theories and research pertaining to development during adolescence. Topics include biological, cognitive and socioemotional development, and the various contexts (family, peers, schools, culture) in which development occurs.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, PHTH majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, PHTH majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90. Not open to CHYS (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P12.
PSYC 3P19
Psychology of Aging
Theories and methods of lifespan development as applied to the special issues that emerge during late adulthood; how physiological, social and cognitive factors interact as individuals cope with the tasks of later years.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), HEAR, NEUR, PHTH, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), HEAR, NEUR, PHTH, SPLS majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P12 or CHYS 2P10.
PSYC 3P20
Human Memory
Current theories and research on human memory from cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Encoding, storing, and retrieving memories in different time scales and/or systems of memory (e.g., short-term memory, working memory, long-term memory, prospective memory).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P20.
Note: may be offered on-site or online
PSYC 3P21
Persuasion and Propaganda
Psychology of social influence, with particular emphasis on persuasion and propaganda.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P30.
Note: may be offered on-site or online.
PSYC 3P22
Social Cognition
Theory and research on how we make sense of ourselves and our social world. Topics include goals, mood, memory, hypothesistesting, counterfactual thinking, stereotypes and culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. After thatdate open to PSYC (single and combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P30.
*PSYC 3P23
Psychology of Parenting
(also offered as CHYS 3P23)
Determinants, varieties and consequences of parenting, focusing on psychological research findings in contemporary parenting/parenthood issues. Topics include different styles of parenting, parent-child relationships, child maltreatment, parenting children with different temperaments, and parenting in ecological contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), CHHS, CHLH, CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P12 or CHYS 2P10.
PSYC 3P24
Classic Theories of Personality
Introduction to personality psychology using a 	heorist by theorist approach. Classic theories of personality, including, psychoanalytic, humanistic and social learning approaches.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single of combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P26
Puberty and Adolescence
Adolescent development from a psychobiological perspective. Topics include occurrence and consequence of early puberty, the influence of hormones and social factors on adolescent development, and adolescent engagement in risky behaviour.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P12.
Note: may be offered on-site or online
PSYC 3P28
Introduction to Abnormal Psychology
Selected mental disorders with respect to classification, diagnosis, etiology and treatment. Biological, psychological and social determinants of psychopathology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits. Not open to PSYC (single or combined) majors.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 or 1P28.
Note: may be offered on-site or online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 2P15 and 3F20.
PSYC 3P30
Critical Thinking in Psychology
Development of scientific thinking and discovery procedures in psychology. The design of experiments and quasi-experiments. Control of variables, statistical power and alternative sources of data. Critical analysis of typical examples of contemporary psychological research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors with either a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2F23.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 3F40.
PSYC 3P31
Applied Social Psychology
Theory and research of social psychology as applied to specific areas of practical and social concern, such as physical and mental health, the justice system, the workplace, education, and the environment. Planning and evaluating social psychological interventions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single and combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P30.
PSYC 3P32
The Development of Deception
Development of non-verbal and verbal deceptive behaviours from the preschool years into adolescence. Influence of cognitive development on deceptive behaviours as well as social factors that influence lie-telling and deceptive behaviours. Legal and social implications of deception.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P12 or CHYS 2P10.
*PSYC 3P33
Psychology of Intergroup Behaviour
(also offered as COMM 3P33)
Social psychological theories and research in the area of intergroup relations and intergroup conflict. Topics include realistic conflict theory, social identity theory, social exchange, relative deprivation and research on intergroup perceptions and attitudes. Current issues/controversies and implications for the resolution of intergroup conflict.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P34
Psychology of Human Sexuality
Introduction to the psychological study of human sexuality. Biopsychosocial approaches are applied to different issues in human sexuality. Topics may include sexual differentiation, gender identity and sexual orientation, attraction and love, paraphilias, and sexual physiology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 2P50.
#PSYC 3P36
Conflict, Contradictions and Development
(also offered as CHYS 3P36)
Conflict in early human development including the understanding of the causes, management and outcomes of conflicts. Cognitive and social strategies used to resolve conflicts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd majors and CHYS minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd majors, GHUM, SOSC students and CHYS minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P12, CHYS 2P10 or permission of the instructor.
PSYC 3P37
Human Evolutionary Psychology
Human psychological characteristics in terms of function and evolution. General principles of evolutionary psychology, individual differences, group differences, adaptations to the natural environment, kin relationships, co-operation and conflict, sexuality and mating, and social organization. Critical evaluation of evidence that a given psychological characteristic may be an adaptation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in the registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; one of PSYC 2P25, 2P30, 3P24 (2P24) or permission of the instructor.
PSYC 3P38
Motivation and Emotion
Scientific examination of human and nonhuman motivation and emotion from evolutionary, physiological, developmental and social perspectives. Topics include hunger, thirst, reproduction, sleep, aggression, stress, arousal, love, drug addiction, curiosity and creativity.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 3V88.
*PSYC 3P39
Computer Data Analysis
(also offered as NEUR 3P39)
Applications of computers to management and analysis of data, including data entry, statistical procedures and interpretation of output, using SPSS.
Lectures/lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors with a minimum 77 percent major average, a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2F23.
Note: Neuroscience majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum of 8.0 overall credits may register. Contact the Department.
PSYC 3P43
Psychology of Film
Psychological theories of perception, cognition, narrative, and emotion through the lens of contemporary and classic films.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90
Note: may be offered on-site or online
PSYC 3P45
Comparative Psychology I
Introduction to comparative psychology, emphasizing the similarity and differences of behaviour patterns across several species (including humans).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P46
Psychology of Food and Eating
Psychological, biological and social factors influencing food/beverage consumption in humans, including theoretical and applied aspects. Topics include physiological control of food intake; biological, orosensory, social and cultural factors influencing food selection; the effects of food on behaviour; eating disorders; and obesity and weight control.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), OEVI, NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, OEVI majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P48
Directed Studies I
Topics, readings and/or research chosen in consultation with a faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90 and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P49
Empirical Directed Studies
Empirical research project chosen in consultation with a faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90 and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P50
Human Learning
Survey of the means by which humans learn, and the role of attention, perception, cognition and memory in learning. Individual, social and cultural factors that influence the acquisition of knowledge and development of skills in a variety of fields including art, science, sports and music. Strategies to promote durable learning and the challenge of transferring learning across contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 2P45.
PSYC 3P51
Health Psychology
Introduction to psychological aspects of health and illness. How behaviour, social context and attitudes influence physiological processes and our health. Topics include health promotion, stress, psychoneuroimmunology, health and physical activity, pain and the health care system.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, PHTH majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, PHTH majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P52
Introduction to Community Psychology
Ethical issues and approaches to research in community settings (e.g. research with vulnerable communities, Indigenous research), interventions, and empowerment.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P30.
PSYC 3P53
Forensic Psychology
Overview of the field of forensic psychology including psychopathy, risk assessment, criminal profiling, deception, eyewitness identification and jury decision-making.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
*PSYC 3P59
Introduction to Human Neuropsychology
(also offered as NEUR 3P59)
Brain function and behaviour through basic research on neuropsychological and neurocognitive function through clinical syndromes and cases. Topics include neural basis of perception, memory, language, motor control, emotion and executive functions. Recovery and advances in assessment, diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of such functional deficits.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 1.0 PSYC credit above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P35, 2P36 or permission of the instructor.
PSYC 3P60
Children's Thinking
Theory and research pertaining to cognitive development. Topics include the development of perception, language, memory, problem solving, reading and social cognition.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR, SPLS majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; one of PSYC 2P12 , 2P20, 2P49, CHYS 2P10.
Note: students may not concurrently register in CHYS 3P65.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit in CHYS 3P65.
#PSYC 3P61
Child Language Acquisition: Early Stages
(also offered as CHYS 3P61 and LING 3P61)
Theories, research and methods in early language development. Linguistic stages in the development of child language at the level of grammar and meaning (phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), APLI (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), HEAR, NEUR, SPLS (single or combined) majors, PSYC, APLI, CHYS minors, HESC, SLSC and TESC Certificate students until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 or LING 1P94.
Note: LING 1P94 may be taken concurrently. LING 1P94 and 1P95(1F94) recommended.
PSYC 3P62
Introduction to Qualitative Research in Psychology
Qualitative research underpinnings (e.g. philosophical foundations and ethical issues), methodologies (e.g. interviews, focus groups, community-based research), and key analytical approaches (e.g. thematic analysis).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
#PSYC 3P64
Music Cognition
(also offered as MUSI 3P64)
How the human mind/brain processes, responds to and produces music. Topics include perception, memory, emotions, performance, and the developmental and social psychology of music.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 or MUSI 1P50 (1F50).
PSYC 3P65
Brain and Language
Neural basis of human language, emphasizing contemporary methods in cognitive neuroscience. Topics include methodology (e.g., behavioural and neuroimaging), biological and developmental bases of language, foundations of language, and word and sentence comprehension.
Lectures/lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and 1.0 PSYC credit above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; one of PSYC 2P20, 2P35, 2P36, 2P49 or permission of instructor.
*PSYC 3P67
Bases of Neuropsychopharmacology
(also offered as NEUR 3P67)
Mechanisms of drug action and classification of psychoactive agents. Elements of pharmacokinetics (drug absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination) and a review of the major groups of psychoactive agents including hypnotics, analgesics, anxiolytics, antidepressants, psychostimulants and neuroleptics, emphasizing mechanisms and consequences of drug action on selected neurotransmitter systems (dopaminergic, noradrenergic, cholinergic, serotonergic).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P35 or 2P36.
PSYC 3P68
Sleep and Wakefulness
Functions, mechanisms, rhythms, physiology and psychology of sleep contrasted with counterparts during wakefulness. Current issues in sleep research and sleep disorders medicine.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P72
Drugs and Behaviour
Basic principles of the kinetics of drugs and drug action, drug effects and drug interactions. Psychology of addictive behaviour. Effects of psychoactive drugs on behaviour and experience. Focus on recreational drugs and psychiatric medications.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, PHTH majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
#PSYC 3P74
Children and Youth in the Digital Age
(also offered as CHYS 3P74)
Theoretical, political, practical, legal and developmental perspectives on the use and impact of digital media and current technologies. Topics may include social networking, cyber-bullying, communication patterns, gamification and media literacy.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors and CHYS minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors, GHUM, SOSC students and CHYS minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P12 or CHYS 2P10.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
PSYC 3P75
Stress
Modern theories and misconceptions about the effects of stress on psychology and health. Diverse material ranges from workplace theories of stress to the effect of stress on our immune system. Coping strategies, methods of stress appraisal and behavioural effects are also studied and physiological systems involved with the mammalian stress response.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors, GHUM, SOSC students and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 3P77
Social Development
Social competence, aggression, friendship and other topics in social development from a variety of developmental perspectives. Methodological and intervention issues relevant to the study of social development.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P12 or CHYS 2P10.
Note: students may not concurrently register in CHYS 3P24. May be offered on-site or online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CHYS 3P24 and 3P77.
PSYC 3P78
Political Psychology and Ideology
Topics include person versus situation factors, ideological thinking, political values, political polarization, politicization of science, voting behaviour, and media influences.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P30 or 2P25
PSYC 3P79
Social Psychology of Technology
Social psychological implications of artificial intelligence, social media, human-robot interactions, and spread of misinformation online, benefits of technology for conducting research, and interpersonal consequences of technology-based communication and interactions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P25 or 2P30.
*PSYC 3P80
Psychology of Interpersonal Behaviour
(also offered as COMM 3P80)
Social psychology of interpersonal attraction and relationships, as studied through experimental, correlational and longitudinal designs. Reinforcement, exchange, attributional, equity and balance models. Levels of relationships. Aspects of the maintenance and dissolution of relationships and of interpersonal psychopathology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), BCMN, COMM, MCMN majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
Note: PSYC 2P30 (2F30) recommended.
PSYC 3P84
Psychological Trauma
Emotional, physiological and social components of psychological trauma including diagnostic concerns and treatments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
*PSYC 3P87
Behavioural Neuroscience
(also offered as NEUR 3P87)
Integrative approach to basic neuroscience, focusing on behavioural analysis in animal models, insights into brain and behaviour relationships provided by the traditional and the latest techniques (e.g., stereotaxic surgery, DREADDs, viral vectors and optogenetics transgenic organisms).
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, 3 hrs alternating weeks.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors until the date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P36 and BIOL 1P92.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC (NEUR) 3F81, 3P81 and 3P82.
#PSYC 3P92
Environmental Psychology
(also offered as ENSU 3P92)
Introduction to the field of Environmental Psychology. Theoretical and applied aspects of the discipline, with an emphasis on understanding the human response to todays most pressing environmental challenges. Topics may include history and theory of environmental psychology, psychological and social barriers to change, risk perception, change strategies for pro-environmental behaviour, sustainability education and communication, and research methods.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; one of PSYC 2P35, PSYC(NEUR) 2P36, or PSYC 2P20.
#PSYC 3Q91
Second Language Acquisition and Learning
(also offered as LING 3Q91)
Theories of subsequent-language learning. Topics include psychological aspects of language learning (behaviourism, cognitivism, humanism), language and culture, contrastive analysis, error analysis, and interlanguage.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#PSYC 3Q98
The Psychology of Screens (Television and Beyond)
(also offered as COMM 3Q98, IASC 3Q98 and PCUL 3Q98)
Cognitive responses to mediated communication including television and new/emerging information and communication technologies. Focus on cognitive effects, theories and research.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of PSYC 1F90, COMM 1F90, IASC 1F01, IASC 1P04 and 1P05 or permission of the instructor.
Note: completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC (COMM/PCUL) 3P95 and COMM 3Q20.
PSYC 3V85-3V89
Special Topics in Psychology
Structure and content of course varies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 4F05
Independent Empirical Research
Empirical research carried out with a faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Project course.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2F23; PSYC 3F40 (3P41 and 3P42) or 3P30.
Note: this course is not a substitute for PSYC 4F91 nor can it be counted toward an Honours degree in Psychology. Students may not concurrently register in PSYC 4F91.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 4F91.
PSYC 4F91
Empirical Research Thesis
Research project carried out with a faculty supervisor whose permission must be obtained prior to registration.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 80 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P01, 3F40 and 3P39.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 4P93.
Note: students may not concurrently register in PSYC 4F05.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 4F05, 4P07 and 4P08.
PSYC 4P07
Psychology Students' Transition to Work
Use of the e-portfolio process to develop students' metacognitive awareness and their understanding of key concepts associated with transitions from university to the workplace.
Lectures, 1.5 hours per week; online activities, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 13.5 credits and 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90. Not open to combined majors and minors.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P01.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 4F91.
PSYC 4P08
Data Science for Academic and Applied Research
Introduction to data management, analysis and visualization using relevant computer software. Provides hands-on experience analyzing interesting psychological questions.
Lab, 2 hours per week; online activities 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single) majors with a 70 percent major average, a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 3F40 or 3P30.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 4F91.
PSYC 4P10
Advanced Directed Studies I
Topic, readings and/or research chosen in consultation with a faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 4P11
Empirical Advanced Directed Studies
Empirical research project chosen in consultation with a faculty member who is willing to supervise the student.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 4P15
Close Relationships
Social psychology of interpersonal relationships, especially romantic relationships and other close relationships (e.g., friendship). Psychological processes underlying the development, maintenance, disruption or end of personal relationships. Current social psychological theories of close relationships.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combine) majors and minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 credits and 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P30.
Students will not receive earned credit in PSYC 4P15 if PSYC 3P80 has been successfully completed.
PSYC 4P18
Organizational Psychology
Psychological principles and research relevant to organizations and industry. Topics include hiring, training, work performance,leadership, and team dynamics.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combine) majors and minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. Students musthave a minimum of 13.5 credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 3F40 or 3P30.
PSYC 4P20
Applied Cognitive Psychology
How basic principles of memory, attention, recognition and decision making influence our behaviour in everyday and forensic contexts. Topics may include brain training, multitasking, person perception, consumer psychology and eyewitness memory.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P20; PSYC 3F40 or 3P30.
PSYC 4P22
Advanced Seminar in Human Memory
Historic and current ideas about memory and the implication these have for our approach to memory in research, everyday function, medical and legal contexts as revealed through such topics as recollections, tip of the tongue, hypnosis and memory, eyewitness testimony and various memory disorders (psychogenic amnesia, childhood amnesia).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 4P25
Psychological Measurement and Personality Research
Principles of psychological measurement, psychometric theory and test construction. Personality structure and the causes and functions of personality variation. Individual differences in the area of personality and associated domains, including cognitive abilities, interests, attitudes, religiosity, and sexuality.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2F23 and 2P25.
PSYC 4P26
Children's Memory Development
Memory development from infancy to childhood. Topics include working memory, autobiographical memory, false memory, memory for events, prospective memory, spatial memory, metacognition, and implicit memory.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P12 or PSYC 2P20.
PSYC 4P27
Developmental Psychopathology
Selected topics related to atypical child and adolescent development. Topics may include the study of intellectual disability, autism, ADHD, learning disorders, antisocial behaviours, anxiety, depression, eating disorders, substance abuse, personality disorders, and schizophrenia. Emphasis on understanding disorders at multiple levels of analysis (biological, cognitive, social) and within various ecological contexts (individual, peer, family, community, culture).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P12, CHYS 2P10 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students must be available to participate in the Special Needs Activity Program (SNAP) at Brock University on Thursday mornings.
PSYC 4P28
Person Perception
Examination of how we perceive and form impressions of other people, including the perception of facial displays of emotion, perception of facial identity and social judgements. Topics include the development of person perception, underlying neural mechanisms and implications for daily life.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combine) majors and minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 credits and 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 3F40 or 3P30.
PSYC 4P29
Psychology of Children and the Law
Examination of the role of child victims/witnesses in the justice system. Topics include eyewitness memory, false confessions, deception detection, and the culpability of the child.
Lectures, Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P12, CHYS 2P10 or CHYS 2P38.
PSYC 4P30
Positive Psychology
Focus on positive experiences, characteristics, and institutions. Main themes include positive psychology as a source of information about well-being and optimal human functioning, central role of psychological science in the study of positive psychology, positive psychology as a lens through which to view all psychological inquiry. 
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in Registration guide. Students must have 13.5 credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P25 or 2P30; PSYC 3F40 or 3P30. 
PSYC 4P34
Psychobiology of Human Sexuality
Advanced topics in human sexuality focusing on current research and a biopsychological perspective.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 3P34 or HLSC 2P50 or permission of the instructor.
PSYC 4P35
Development During Infancy
Human development from conception to 3 years. Topics may include brain, perceptual, cognitive, social, emotional development and animal models. The impact of early experience on later development.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and SPLS majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 and 2P12; PSYC 3P60 or 3P77.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in PSYC 3P35.
PSYC 4P44
Psychology of Social Justice
Basic research and theories addressing how people think about and respond to justice and injustice as subjective concepts. Topics include the nature of people's motivation for justice, how justice is defined and the influence of justice concerns on human behaviour.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors with a minimum 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 4P49
Human Emotion
Historical and current beliefs about the nature of human emotions. Topics may include the definition and measurement of emotions, connections between emotional experience, emotion physiology, and emotion regulation across positive and negative affect, the relationship between emotion and other domains of psychology, developmental changes in emotion across adulthood, and/or emotion-related psychopathology (depression, autism).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR majors and PSYC minors until the date specified in Registration guide. Students must have 13.5 credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 4P50
Psychosocial Problems in Adolescence and Emerging Adulthood
Theory and research on internalizing and externalizing problem behaviours in adolescence and emerging adulthood, as well as the factors that enhance resilience and competence.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 13.5 credits until the date specified in the Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P12 or CHYS 2P10.
*PSYC 4P55
Neural Mechanisms, Hormones and Behaviour
(also offered as NEUR 4P55)
Relations among the hormones of the endocrine system, the nervous system and behaviour; the involvement of hormones in sexual behaviour, the mechanisms of stress and cognition; relevant research methodologies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P35 or 2P36.
*PSYC 4P56
Maturation and Development
(also offered as CHYS 4P56)
Influences of brain maturation on psychological development and vice versa, and the implications for behaviour.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined),CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of PSYC 2P12, 2P35, 2P36, CHYS 2P10.
PSYC 4P57
Developmental Origins of Health and Disease
Early-life environmental contributions to later-life health, including maternal/fetal adverse exposures and nutrition, infection, socioeconomic status, and early-life adversity. Research exploring biological mechanisms involved in social determinants of health.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P35 or 2P36.
PSYC 4P58
Neuroplasticity and Behaviour in Adulthood and Aging
Examination of the link between adult brain plasticity (especially neurogenesis) and animal vertebrate behaviour (i.e. learning, memory, social behaviour, stress, and anxiety).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P35 or 2P36.
PSYC 4P59
Psychology of Human-Animal Relations
Topics include cognitive rationalizations, dehumanization, the meat paradox, speciesism, and human-animal relations affecting climate change and zoonotic diseases, affection and bonding with animals.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors and NEUR majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90; PSYC 2P30.
PSYC 4P60
Psychology of Bilingualism
Methodology (e.g., behavioural and neuroimaging), second language acquisition (in children and adults), social psychological aspects of bilingualism and cognitive consequences of bilingualism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), NEUR, SPLS majors and PSYC minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 credits and 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
PSYC 4P63
Human Psychophysiology
Concepts related to acquisition and analysis of bioelectrical signals recorded from the brain, pupillary system, skeletomotor system, cardiovascular system, electrodermal system and respiratory system. Applications to health and human factors include arousal, attention, emotion, stress, immunology, lie detection and brain injury.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined), HEAR, NEUR majors and PSYC minors until the date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or 3.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P35 or 2P36.
PSYC 4P69
Professional Topics in Psychology
Topics may include privacy legislation, confidentiality, research ethics, post-degree training and professional programs, and other issues that individuals in psychology-related professions may face.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until the date specified in Registration guide. Students must have 13.5 credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 1F90.
PSYC 4P71
Psychology of Prejudice and Discrimination
Theory and research on the basic processes involved in prejudice and discrimination. Topics include stereotyping, emotions, competition, contemporary prejudice, implicit biases, individual differences, and prejudice reduction.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors who hold a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P30.
PSYC 4P72
Psychology of Violent Predators
Multi-disciplinary approach in an effort to understand the psychology of criminals who engage in predatory violence, including serial killers, mass murderers, child molesters, and rapists. Theories, concepts and research from the fields of psychology, sociology, criminology and criminal justice that social scientists employ to understand and respond to violent criminals.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors who hold a minimum of 13.0 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P15 (3F20) or 3P53.
PSYC 4P77
Introduction to the Profession of Clinical Psychology
Review of ethical issues, approaches to assessment, research on the efficacy of psychotherapy and a selective review of evidence-based approaches for treating specific disorders.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single and combined) majors and minors who hold a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P15 (3F20) or 3P24.
PSYC 4P79
Introduction to Counselling and Psychotherapy
Contemporary major theories of counselling and psychotherapy, including client/person-centered counselling, cognitive-behaviour therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy, psychodynamic psychotherapy, and post-modern approaches.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors who hold a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 2P15 (3F20).
PSYC 4P92
History of Psychology
Historical development of the multiple orientations within psychology. Philosophical and scientific influences on the field of psychology and their relevance to new developments in psychology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one of PSYC 3F40, 3P30, CHYS 3P10, 3P15.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 4F91, PSYC 4P08.
Note: students not completing a thesis in the same year or students in combined programs completing a thesis in another discipline should contact the Department.
PSYC 4P93
Honours Thesis Seminar
Discussion of Undergraduate thesis research and preparation, including examination of various topics in Psychology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 80 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 4F91.
PSYC 4P95
Literature Research
Scientific literature relevant to the topic of the empirical thesis.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors with a minimum 80 percent major average and permission of the Department.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 4F91.
PSYC 4V85-4V89
Special Topics in Psychology
Structure and content of course varies.
Restriction: open to PSYC (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or 5.0 PSYC credits above PSYC 1F90.
CO-OP COURSES
PSYC 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
PSYC 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
PSYC 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
PSYC 0N04
Work Placement IV
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
PSYC 0N05
Work Placement V
Optional co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
PSYC 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentation, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
PSYC 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 0N01.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PSYC 2C02
Co-op Reflective and Integration II
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 0N02.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PSYC 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 0N03.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PSYC 2C04
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration IV
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 0N04.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
PSYC 2C05
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration V
Provide student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academics studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to PSYC Co-op students.
Prerequisite(s): PSYC 0N90.
Corequisite(s): PSYC 0N05.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit, write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Administrative Assistant
Linda Di Raddo
905-688-5550, extension 5050
Mackenzie Chown B327
brocku.ca/social-sciences/psychology
The Department of Psychology offers four-year programs of study leading to a BA (Honours) Psychology, a BA with Major Psychology, and a three-year BA Pass degree program. Programs are designed to provide students with a broad introduction to the field of psychology including research methodology, psychological theory and application. In addition, the 20-credit degree programs give students the opportunity to prepare for admission to professional and advanced degree training in a variety of fields. Students interested in pursuing graduate study specifically in psychology should complete the Honours program.
Students wishing to major in Psychology must apply to declare their major. Declare or Change Major forms are available in the Registrar's Office and online at brocku.ca/registrar/forms. The Department believes that a broadly-based liberal arts and science background is appropriate in conjunction with a major in Psychology. It is required that Honours students acquire some background in other disciplines as part of their undergraduate program by taking elective courses in areas outside of Psychology. Students wishing to pursue an Honours (Research) degree must complete a PSYC 4F91 Application. Applications are available in the Department of Psychology.
Students wishing to take PSYC 3F40 and 3P39 require a minimum 77 percent major average. Students wishing to take PSYC 4F91, 4P93 and 4P95 require a minimum 80 percent major average.
The requirements for graduation with a BA (Honours) are a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average. The requirements for a BA with Major and a Pass BA are a minimum 60 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent overall average.

74

Public Health

75

Recreation and Leisure Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
RECREATION AND LEISURE STUDIES COURSES
RECL 1P03
Introduction to Leisure in Canadian Society
Leisure in contemporary society. Relation of leisure to quality of life, factors influencing access to and experience of leisure. Self-examination of leisure, play and recreation in one's lifestyle.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: not open to RECL majors.
Students will not receive earned credit in RECL 1P03 if RECL 1P90 has been successfully completed. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 1F91.
RECL 1P90
Introduction to Recreation and Leisure Studies
Fundamental concepts related to the discipline of recreation and leisure studies including leisure theory and philosophy, and introduction to community, outdoor and therapeutic recreation specializations including planning, policy, service delivery and leadership.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and minors.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 1F91.
RECL 1P95
Recreation Programming
Theoretical and practical foundations for planning, designing, promoting, implementing and evaluating recreation programs.
Lecture, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus fieldwork.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and minors.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 2P00.
RECL 1P99
Leadership in Parks, Recreation and Leisure Services
Leadership theory and practice at the small group, agency, and community level of parks, recreation and leisure services contexts. Ethical and value-based leadership skills with diverse people and communities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and minors.
Note: may include weekend/evening field experience. Field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 2P21.
RECL 2P02
Foundations of Therapeutic Recreation
Philosophical and theoretical underpinnings of therapeutic recreation, including theories, programming models and techniques of service delivery. Examination of the impact of social attitudes towards illnesses and disabilities and attitudes and self-concepts held by individuals living with illnesses and/or disabilities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format
RECL 2P07
Introduction to Research Design and Evaluation
Principles and techniques for research. Issues concerning the construction, administration and evaluation of data collection as well as the processing and analysis of data.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 4.0 credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE (PEKN) 2P08 and SPMA 1P97 (2P07).
RECL 2P11
The Social Psychology of Leisure and Recreation
Dimensions of human behaviour during free time including lifestyle, social habits and motives for leisure and recreation.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format
RECL 2P15
Understanding Communities and Community Organizations
Introduction of communities and community dynamics as they relate to recreation. Focus on the varied roles of service providers, local governance processes, and organizational development and operations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus field experience.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21).
Note: field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department. May be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 2P05 and SPMA 3P05.
RECL 2P16
Outdoor Recreation Theory and Practices I
Outdoor recreation theories and engagement in a variety of introductory outdoor field experiences. May involve backpacking, winter camping, rock climbing, canoeing, snowshoeing and cross country skiing.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, field experience.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: includes required weekend experiences; field experience fee will be charged; consult the Department. Labs vary up to 7 hours per week to a maximum of 40 hours per term.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 2F16.
RECL 2P25
Child and Youth Work in Community Recreation
Philosophies and models guiding the delivery of programs and services. Diverse needs of children and youth as well as contexts for service provision.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week; plus field experience.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend/evening field experience. Field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Please note vulnerable sector screening could take up to two months. Cost associated with the police record check is a student responsibility. Students may not be allowed to engage in service learning if these requirements are not met. Documentation is due at the first class. May be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 2P26
Outdoor Recreation Theory and Practices II
Outdoor recreation theories and engagement in a variety of introductory field experiences. May involve backpacking, winter camping, rock climbing, canoeing, snowshoeing and cross country skiing.
Lectures, 2 hours per week; lab, field experience.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P16 or permission of the instructor.
Note: includes required weekend experiences; field experience fee will be charged; consult the Department. Labs vary up to 7 hours per week to a maximum of 40 hours per term.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 2F16.
RECL 2P52
Therapeutic Recreation and Persons with Disabilities
Etiology of various disabilities (e.g., intellectual, emotional, social and physical) and illnesses. Examination of the role of therapeutic recreation in facilitating meaningful leisure opportunities for individuals living with disabilities.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 4.0 credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format
RECL 2P56
Outdoor Leadership for Non-Majors
Examination and practice of introductory outdoor leadership theory and technical skills. Engagement in an extended outdoor field experience, skill development and leadership opportunities.
Lectures, extended field experience.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits and permission of the Department. Not open to Outdoor Recreation majors.
Note: conducted during two weeks of the Spring session. Field experience fee will be charged; consult the Department.
RECL 2P62
Leisure Education in Therapeutic Recreation
Exploration of conceptual models, systematic planning, implementation strategies, facilitation techniques and application for leisure education in therapeutic recreation settings.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P02 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
#RECL 2P63
Theory and Practice of Music Therapy
(also offered as MUSI 2P63)
Introduction to the theoretical foundations and major practical techniques of music therapy. Topics from the perspectives of both individual therapists and those working in a multi-disciplinary team.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL, MUSI (single or combined) and MUSC majors with a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission or the Department.
Note: may include site visits; field trip expenses may be required.
RECL 2P80
Foundations of Gerontology
Psychosocial and sociocultural examination of aging and older adulthood from an interdisciplinary perspective.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HLSC, KINE, NUSC, RECL and SPMA majors and GERO minors until the date specified in the Registration guide, with a minimum of 4.0 or more credits.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit RECL 3V98.
RECL 2P94
Indigenous Leisure
Current and historical leisure realities for Indigenous peoples in Canada and the impact of colonization on Indigenous forms of leisure.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and minors with a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3M01-3M25
Special Studies in Recreation and Leisure Studies
Issues in recreation and leisure studies
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits and approval of the Department.
RECL 3P00
Directed Readings
Topic not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 75 percent major average, a minimum 7.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise.
RECL 3P04
Leisure and Health Promotion
Physical, psychological, and social factors that affect leisure and health outcomes. The intersections of determinants of health, behaviour change theories, dimensions of health, and leisure contexts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P03, 1P90 (1F91) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P06
Outdoor Recreation Resource Management
Social and ecological principles in the management of people in outdoor settings. Theoretical and applied perspectives on decision-making systems (governance), management frameworks, and site considerations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P95 (2P00), 2P56 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department. May be offered online.
RECL 3P11
Sociological Aspects of Leisure and Diversity
Theories and methods common to the social investigation of leisure. Classic and topical literature demonstrating the impact leisure has on outcomes of interest and the role of leisure in a diverse society.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P07 and 2P11 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P12
Leisure and Aging
Role of leisure in adult development with specific focus on the aging process, leisure needs and leisure services. Basic concepts associated with leisure, aging, targeting leisure services, research and public policy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P03, 1P90 (1F91) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may take place at an off-campus site. Gerontology minors, without the prerequisite, will need to contact the Department to register. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Please note vulnerability screening could take up to two months. It is the student's responsibility to complete the process and cover expenses. Students may not be allowed to engage in service-learning if these requirements are not met. Documentation is due at the first class. May be offered online or in a blended format.
#RECL 3P14
Aquatics
(also offered as KINE 3P14)
Educational and developmental aquatics applications. Activities may include swimming and other water based experiences to develop physically literate, versatile, adaptive, and lifespan approaches.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Junior/Intermediate), and RECL majors and minors until date specified in the Registration guide. After that date open to BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours) / BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), RECL majors and minors.  Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Note: modes of instruction/evaluation typically include vigorous activity in deep and shallow water.
RECL 3P16
Inclusive Outdoor Adventure Recreation
Issues, models, strategies and practical skills required to design and deliver outdoor adventure recreation programs and activities including people with disabilities.
Lectures, lab, field experience, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P95 (2P00) 2P56 or permission or the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 2P96.
RECL 3P24
Psychosocial Coping and Adaptation
Role of leisure in the processes of psychosocial coping, and adaptation to negative life events and conflicts in society. Differentiation between coping, adaptation, and post-traumatic growth.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P11 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P25
Community Development in Recreation: Philosophy and Practice
Focus on the community development perspective and the roles that recreation plays in the community development process. Emphasis on frameworks, philosophies and techniques that guide agencies toward greater responsiveness to the community.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P15.
Note: may include weekend/evening field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department. May be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P26
Outdoor and Environmental Education
Theoretical and practical investigation of the outdoors as a setting to develop environmental awareness and connection to place.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; plus fieldwork.
Restriction: open to RECL, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior) majors and Outdoor Recreation minors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of RECL 1P90 (1F91), 1P03, KINE (PEKN) 1P93 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department. May be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P30
Risk Management in Recreation
Issues and concerns with the identification and management of recreation and leisure programs on individual, organizational and industry-wide levels. Legal and industry standards for risk management.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P95 (2P00), 2P56 or permission of the instructor.
RECL 3P32
Therapeutic Recreation Program Planning
Procedures necessary for assessment, planning, implementation, management and evaluation specific to therapeutic recreation services.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P62 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P36
Adventure-Based Learning in Recreation
Theoretical and practical investigation of historical, social, and psychological foundations of adventure recreation, focusing on the use of adventure programming to develop learning in self and groups.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; plus fieldwork.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of RECL 1P90 (1F91), 1P03, KINE (PEKN) 1P93 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department.
RECL 3P45
Campus Recreation
Practical and theoretical aspects of campus recreation relating to different programming areas, values of recreational sports and the role of campus recreational sports programs in the context of higher education settings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P95 (2P00) or permission of the instructor.
RECL 3P50
Entrepreneurship in Recreation Service Organizations
Characteristics of an entrepreneur, understanding social enterprise, the identification and evaluation of business opportunities in the recreation sector, the assembly of resources and the development of a business plan.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P15 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 4P50.
RECL 3P51
Group Dynamics in Recreation
Analysis and application of group dynamics theory, techniques and research to successful facilitation in a recreation context.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 4P51.
RECL 3P62
Assessment in Therapeutic Recreation
Current assessment and evaluation instruments and procedures used in Therapeutic Recreation. The validity, reliability and practical utility issues in conceptualization, data collection methods, analysis, and interpretation in the assessment and evaluation of persons with disabilities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P02 or permission of the instructor
Corequisite(s): RECL 3Q07 or permission of the instructor
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P70
Financing Community Recreation Services
Financial concepts and strategies used in community recreation organizations. Topics include economics, budgeting, revenue sources, pricing, sponsorship, grant writing and fund raising as they relate to programs, services and/or special events across sectors.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P15.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P76
Recreation Facilities Management
Examination and analysis of the organization and operation of a variety of community, therapeutic and outdoor recreation facilities.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 7.0 credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P95 (2P00) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department.
RECL 3P86
Advanced Outdoor Leadership Theory and Practices
Examination of advanced outdoor leadership theories and pedagogy. Engagement in an extended outdoor field experience, leadership skill development and co-instructional opportunities.
Field trip, seven days; pre-trip session, three days; post-trip session, four days.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P16 or permission of the instructor.
Note: will be conducted during two weeks in Spring session. Field experience fee will be charged; consult the Department.
RECL 3P91
Migratory Pursuits in Leisure
National and global exploration of migration, settlements and relocations for leisure purposes. Practical application and theoretical implication of local and global patterns of itineraries for revival and rest (physical/spiritual/psychological) to second homes, cottaging, timeshares, natural sanatoria/spas and spiritual retreats.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 3P11.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3P95
Recreation and Leisure Services Field Experience
Practical experiences in specific leisure service agencies. Placement in a community recreation or leisure setting which may include leisure forms (recreation, play, sport, the arts) in unique and varied socio-cultural contexts (national or international).
Seminar, field work, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P95 (2P00), 2P07 and 2P11 or permission of the instructor
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 4F15.
RECL 3Q07
Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative means of understanding, interpreting and analyzing statistical data and information.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE (PEKN) 3P08 and SPMA 3P07.
RECL 3Q16
Environmental and Ecological Literacy
Examination of relevant theories and concepts including the roles of environmental and heritage interpretation as pathways to ecological literacy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors with a minimum of 7.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P03, 1P90 (1F91) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department. May be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3Q17
Qualitative Approaches to Inquiry
Theories, approaches, designs, methods and procedures for conducting qualitative studies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P07 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in HLSC 3P37, and KINE (PEKN) 3P18.
RECL 3Q26
National Outdoor Leadership Field Experience I
May include practice of wilderness expedition skills, leadership, group dynamics, safety, judgment and environmental studies.
Extended field experience.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students can receive credit for participating in extended outdoor recreation field experiences offered by NOLS. Students are responsible for registering with sponsoring agency, logistics (e.g., transportation, fees) and supplying Department with documentation of successful completion.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned credit and credit obtained in RECL 3Q36, 3Q56, 4Q36 and 4Q56.
RECL 3Q36
Outward Bound Canada Field Experience I
Advanced expedition management, outdoor leadership, wilderness travel, risk management, environmental assessment and ecological stewardship through participation in an Outward Bound Canada course.
Extended field experience.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students can receive credit for participating in extended outdoor recreation field experiences offered by Outward Bound Canada. Students are responsible for registering with sponsoring agency, logistics (e.g., transportation, fees) and supplying Department with documentation of successful completion.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 3Q26, 3Q56, 4Q26 and 4Q56.
RECL 3Q46
Wilderness First Responder
Fundamental concepts and practical application of wilderness first aid in remote outdoor settings, engagement in outdoor emergency scenarios and tools, techniques, and strategies for evacuation of patients in remote settings.
Lectures, practical experience, 80 hours.
Note: students can receive credit for participating in approved Wilderness First Responder courses; consult the Department. Students are responsible for registering with sponsoring agency, logistics (e.g., transportation, fees) and supplying Department with documentation of successful completion. Credit will not be given for re-certification.
RECL 3Q56
Outdoor Field Experience I
Examination of the theories and methods in providing outdoor field activities through participation in a comprehensive field experience with an approved organization.
Field experience.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students can receive credit for participating in extended outdoor recreation field experiences. Students are responsible for registering with sponsoring agency, logistics (e.g., transportation, fees) and supplying Department with documentation of successful completion.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 3Q26, 3Q36, 4Q26 and 4Q36.
RECL 3Q92
Therapeutic Recreation and Behavioural Health
Examination of the role of leisure and therapeutic recreation in addressing health issues for individuals with mental illness, addictions and other behavioural issues. Exploration of the history of mental illness and mental health services, public policy related to behavioural health and various intervention philosophies as they relate to therapeutic recreation practice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P02.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3Q99
Therapeutic Recreation and Physical Rehabilitation
Examination of the role of therapeutic recreation in the treatment and rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities and illnesses, emphasizing terminology, etiology, and prognosis of specific disabilities, program development and assessment.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P02.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 3V12-3V99
Special Studies in Recreation and Leisure
Series of lectures, seminars and practical experiences offered in specialized areas of recreation and leisure.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and permission of the Department.
RECL 4F07
Group Honours Thesis Research Project
Analysis of research assumptions and methodologies in recreation and leisure studies for a group research project.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, approval to year 4 (honours), permission of the Department and GERO minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and a minimum of 70 percent major average.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 4F27.
RECL 4F22
Advanced Methods in Therapeutic Recreation
Examination of contemporary intervention strategies used in therapeutic recreation service. Issues related to professional practice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; field experience, 2 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): RECL 3P32 and 3P62, or RECL 3V22 and 3V32 or permission of the instructor.
Note: clinical lab takes place at an off-campus facility. Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening (vulnerability screening can take up to two months), proof of immunization and TB test are required by placement agencies. It is the student's responsibility to ensure the process is complete at his/her expense. A mask fit may be required. Student may not be allowed to attend placement if these requirements are not met. Documentation due August 1. May be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 4F27
Individual Honours Thesis Research Project
Analysis of research assumptions and methodologies in recreation and leisure studies for an individual research project.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits, 80 percent major average, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: project topic to be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise. Students contemplating a thesis must consult with and submit a detailed proposal to the possible Faculty Supervisor by April 30th. Regulations governing the thesis may be obtained from the Academic Advisor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 4F07.
RECL 4F55
International Field Experience in Recreation and Leisure
Leisure forms (recreation, play, sport, the arts) in an international context; recreation as a tool for social development; comparative analysis of leisure policy and service delivery; leisure and socio-cultural relationships.
Lectures, lab, fieldwork.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: students must complete an application and interview prior to being admitted into the course. Students are required to pay their own expenses.
RECL 4M01-4M11
Special Topics in Recreation & Leisure Studies for Professionals
Theoretical Aspects of Leisure Studies
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 9.0 credits and approval of the Department.
RECL 4M11
2021-2022: Major Research Paper in Recreation and Leisure Studies
Individualized program of reading and research in a topic area negotiated by the student and course instructor.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P11 and RECL 3P11.
Note: blended format. Will meet approximately once a month for eight hours on weekends at various locations including off-site/GTA. Contact the department for more information.
RECL 4P00
Advanced Directed Readings
Topic not covered in the department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 75 percent major average, a minimum of 13.5 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise.
RECL 4P01
Leisure and Restorative Settings
Significance and meanings of Canadian and international leisure-scapes (natural and constructed) for rejuvenation of self. Leisure as a restorative experience in locations such as preserves, gardens, shrines and heritage sites.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors until date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 3M01, 3P11 or permission of instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 4P05
Planning in Community Recreation Organizations
Provides students with an understanding of the planning process and strategies in community recreation organizations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of RECL 3M15, 3M25, 3P25.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 4P16
Advanced Wilderness Program Planning
Analysis and application of the planning and execution of an extended outdoor wilderness trip.
Lectures, 3 hours per week; extended field experience.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): RECL 3P30 and 3P86 or permission of the instructor.
Note: additional ten day field trip is required which departs immediately after final exams and may extend into Spring session. Field experience fee will be charged; consult the Department.
RECL 4P21
Cultural Politics of Leisure
Leisure as a cultural and political phenomenon. Emphasis on popular leisure pursuits such as toys, television and film, sport, gambling and deviant leisure. Issues of power, status, representation, commodification and social control.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): RECL 3M01, 3P11 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 4P35
Current Issues in Community Recreation
Problem-based investigation into current issues that community recreation leaders confront in service delivery. Emphasis on building a foundation for problem-solving skills to facilitate informed ethical decisions.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of RECL 3M15, 3M25, 3P25.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
*RECL 4P43
Gender, Leisure and Families
(also offered as WGST 4P43)
Feminist analysis on the relationships between gender, leisure and the family. Gendered aspects of leisure in a variety of social and cultural contexts, including families, informal and social settings, organized leisure and the media. Issues of resistance and reconstruction of gender relations and leisure as a form of political practice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 13.5 credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 3P11, WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL (WGST) 3P43.
RECL 4P77
Program Evaluation in Recreation
Program evaluation and needs assessment in planning, managing and administering delivery of leisure services.
Lectures, 3 hours per week
Restriction: open to RECL majors and GERO minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2M97, 2P07 or permission of the instructor
Note: GERO minors without the prerequisite will need to contact the Department to register.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 4F15.
RECL 4P86
Wilderness Philosophies
Development of major perspectives towards wilderness. Critical discourse on human place in relation to the natural environment.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P95 (2P00), 2P56 or permission or the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience. Field experience fee may be charged, consult the department.
RECL 4P92
Facilitation Techniques in Therapeutic Recreation
Examination and application of facilitation techniques used to support behavioural, cognitive, affective changes when working with clients. Recent innovative therapeutic approaches as they relate to therapeutic recreation practice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week;
Restriction: open to RECL majors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): one of RECL 3P32, 3P62, 3V22, 3V32.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 4P96
Issues in Outdoor Recreation
Cultural, contemporary and future issues and concerns in outdoor recreation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits or approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): RECL 2P56 or 3P86; RECL 3P30 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience; field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department. May be offered online or in a blended format.
RECL 4Q26
National Outdoor Leadership Field Experience II
May include practice of wilderness expedition skills, leadership, group dynamics, safety, judgment and environmental studies.
Extended field experience.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students can receive credit for participating in extended outdoor recreation field experiences offered by NOLS. Students are responsible for registering with sponsoring agency, logistics (e.g., transportation, fees) and supplying Department with documentation of successful completion.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 3Q36, 3Q56, 4Q36 and 4Q56.
RECL 4Q36
Outward Bound Canada Field Experience II
Remote wilderness experience with cultural exchange in Inuit communities on Baffin Island with Outward Bound Canada. May involve skiing, dogsledding, home stays and trips with Inuit hunters and elders.
Extended field experience.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students can receive credit for participating in extended outdoor recreation field experiences offered by Outward Bound Canada. Students are responsible for registering with sponsoring agency, logistics (e.g., transportation, fees) and supplying Department with documentation of successful completion.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 3Q26, 3Q56, 4Q26 and 4Q56.
RECL 4Q56
Outdoor Field Experience II
Advanced examination of the theories and methods in providing outdoor field activities through participation in a comprehensive field experience with an approved organization.
Extended field experience.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: students can receive credit for participating in extended outdoor recreation field experiences. Students are responsible for registering with sponsoring agency, logistics (e.g., transportation, fees) and supplying Department with documentation of successful completion.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in RECL 3Q26, 3Q36, 4Q26 and 4Q36.
#RECL 4Q90
Foundations of Collaboration and Teamwork
(also offered as HLSC 4Q90, KINE 4Q90, NUSC 4Q90 and SPMA 4Q90)
Core competencies for effective teamwork. Topics include collaborative leadership, team functioning, communication, role clarity, conflict management and client-centred approach as it applied to inter professional settings.
Restriction: open to RECL, BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), BMED, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, NUBR, NUSC, PHTH and SPMA majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
RECL 4Q96
Experiential Education in Recreation and Leisure
Historical, philosophical, spiritual, psychological foundations, theories and practices of experiential education in recreation and leisure settings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to RECL majors and Outdoor Recreation minors with a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 1P03 and 2P56 or RECL 1P90 (1F91) and 1P99 (2P21) or permission of the instructor.
Note: may include weekend field experience. Field experience fee may be charged, consult the Department. May be offered online or in a blended format.
INTERNSHIP COURSES
RECL 4F02
Internship in Therapeutic Recreation
Minimum of 15 weeks, full-time internship under the supervision of a full-time employed Therapeutic Recreation professional.
Restriction: open to Therapeutic Recreation majors with a minimum of 17.5 credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 4F22, (RECL 4P12 and 4P22) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students must participate in an orientation seminar and workshop (total 12 hours).Materials fee may be charged; consult the Department.
RECL 4F25
Internship in Community Recreation
Minimum of three months (12 weeks) full time internship in an approved community based recreation service organization (municipality, not-for-profit organization, grassroots community organization).
Orientation, seminar, evaluation workshops, 12 hours.
Restriction: open to Community Recreation majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum of 17.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 4P05 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students must participate in an orientation seminar and workshops (total 12 hours). Materials fee may be charged; consult the Department.
RECL 4F26
Internship in Outdoor Recreation
Minimum of three months (12 week) full time internship in an approved outdoor recreation based organization (conservation authority, outdoor outfitter, camp organization, outdoor/experiential education centre).
Orientation, seminar, evaluation workshops, 12 hours.
Restriction: open to Outdoor Recreation majors with a minimum of 17.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): RECL 4P16, 4P96 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students must participate in an orientation seminar and workshops (total 12 hours). Materials fee may be charged; consult the Department.
NON-CREDIT COURSE
RECL 0N06
Brock BaseCamp
Participation in new student outdoor orientation experience. May include backpacking, canoeing, rock climbing, sea kayaking or mountain biking.
Extended field experience.
Restriction: acceptance to Brock University, Brock BaseCamp program and permission of the Department.
Administrative Assistant
Rachael Bujtas
905-688-5550, extension 3259
Academic South 357
brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/recreation-leisure/
The Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies offers four-year programs of study leading to a Bachelor of Recreation and Leisure Studies Honours and a Bachelor of Recreation and Leisure Studies with Major. The Department also offers a three-year (Pass) program leading to a Bachelor of Recreation and Leisure Studies. The program is designed to qualify graduates for a wide range of positions in the field of leisure services.
The Community Recreation program prepares students with the knowledge, competencies, and philosophical grounding to take leadership roles in the community sector. Courses prepare students for effective practice in public and non-profit settings with courses in organizational development, finance, marketing, programming, planning, and research. Community development and responsiveness to diversity are emphasized, particularly of youth and groups that are marginalized. Fieldwork opportunities and community engagement are embedded throughout the curriculum.
The Outdoor Recreation program focuses on leadership in the natural environment. This program provides students with the skills, knowledge and dispositions necessary to serve as wilderness trip leaders, to facilitate groups in outdoor recreation settings, to work in a variety of outdoor and experiential education environments, and to serve as agents of social and environmental change in the world. All classroom and field-based activities include lectures, outdoor and experiential activities, and small group work.
Students can receive credit for participating in extended outdoor recreation field experiences offered by Outward Bound Canada, the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS), Wilderness Medical Associates, ALIVE Outdoors and other agencies. Students must consult departments before registering with the sponsoring agency and are responsible for registration, transportation and fees associated with the experience.
The Therapeutic Recreation program prepares students to work with individuals with disabilities, illnesses and other limiting conditions to support them to achieve independence and full engagement in meaningful life activities through positive leisure involvement. These aims are achieved through client-centred individual and/or group interventions designed to teach skills, improve functional capacities, support psychosocial adaptation and address underlying issues that impact or limit participation in meaningful life activities, particularly leisure. The department offers courses that can lead to achieving certification through the National Council on Therapeutic Recreation Certification (NCTRC). Students who wish to achieve certification must complete 3.0 credits of supportive coursework in the broad area of human services. Supportive course areas may include adapted physical education, education, human biological/physical sciences, psychology, sociology, health related issues, communication, and human behaviours and problems. Courses must be from outside the Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies.

76

Sciences
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
FACULTY OF MATH AND SCIENCE COURSE
FMSC 1P00
Transitioning to University Science
Foundational mathematics and topics from introductory science. Time management, learning skills, and library research skills. Data analysis and presentation using spreadsheets; lab report preparation.Note: More detailed information is available at https://brocku.ca/mathematics-science/transitioning-to-university-science-fmsc-1p00/
Lectures, 4 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to BSc Sciences students until date specified in Registration guide.
SCIENCE COURSE
SCIE 0N01
Work Experience
Provides students with a work integrated learning experience with an approved employer relevant to the student's degree learning outcomes.
Restriction: Open to students with a minimum of 10.0 credits and who have attained 70% major and 60% non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor (students are required to successfully complete online professional training modules designed and delivered by Co-op, Career and Experiential Education (CCEE) prior to the start of their work experience term).
Note: Full-time work experience employment, 35-40 hours per week for 12 to 16 weeks.
CO-OP COURSE
SCIE 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentations, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Science Co-op students.
Note: see Director of Co-op, Career and Experiential Education.
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
FACULTY OF MATH AND SCIENCE COURSE
FMSC 1P00
Transitioning to University Science
Foundational mathematics and topics from introductory science. Time management, learning skills, and library research skills. Data analysis and presentation using spreadsheets; lab report preparation.Note: More detailed information is available at https://brocku.ca/mathematics-science/transitioning-to-university-science-fmsc-1p00/
Lectures, 4 hours per week; tutorial, 1 hour per week.
Restriction: open to BSc Sciences students until date specified in Registration guide.
SCIENCE COURSE
SCIE 0N01
Work Experience
Provides students with a work integrated learning experience with an approved employer relevant to the student's degree learning outcomes.
Restriction: Open to students with a minimum of 10.0 credits and who have attained 70% major and 60% non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor (students are required to successfully complete online professional training modules designed and delivered by Co-op, Career and Experiential Education (CCEE) prior to the start of their work experience term).
Note: Full-time work experience employment, 35-40 hours per week for 12 to 16 weeks.
CO-OP COURSE
SCIE 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentations, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Science Co-op students.
Note: see Director of Co-op, Career and Experiential Education.

77

Social Sciences
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
SOSC 0N01
Work Experience
Provides students with a work integrated learning experience with an approved employer relevant to the student's degree learning outcomes.Restriction: Open to students with a minimum of 10.0 credits and who have attained 70% major and 60% non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor (students are required to successfully complete online professional training modules designed and delivered by Co-op, Career and Experiential Education (CCEE) prior to the start of their work experience term).
Note: Full-time work experience employment, 35-40 hours per week for 12 to 16 weeks.
SOSC 2P90
Research in the social sciences
Introduction to argument, evidence and method in social science research. Understanding arguments, kinds of evidence, the relation between theory, research design, methodology and method, and approaches to gathering and weighing evidence and arguments.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
SOSC 0N01
Work Experience
Provides students with a work integrated learning experience with an approved employer relevant to the student's degree learning outcomes.Restriction: Open to students with a minimum of 10.0 credits and who have attained 70% major and 60% non-major average.
Prerequisite(s): Permission of the Instructor (students are required to successfully complete online professional training modules designed and delivered by Co-op, Career and Experiential Education (CCEE) prior to the start of their work experience term).
Note: Full-time work experience employment, 35-40 hours per week for 12 to 16 weeks.
SOSC 2P90
Research in the social sciences
Introduction to argument, evidence and method in social science research. Understanding arguments, kinds of evidence, the relation between theory, research design, methodology and method, and approaches to gathering and weighing evidence and arguments.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.

78

Sociology

79

Sport Management
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
SPORT MANAGEMENT COURSES
SPMA 1P91
Introduction to Sport Management
Micro aspects of management applied to sport, including human resources, sport marketing, sponsorship, finance, event management, sport law, and related issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to BBA and BAcc majors.
SPMA 1P92
Understanding Sport Industry Sectors
Macro aspects of the sport industry, including key actors, governance, funding, current research and industry trends in public, commercial, and non-profit sectors.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: an experiential component may be included.
SPMA 1P93
Diversity and Inclusion in Sport Management
Topics may include managing diverse workplaces; initiatives to create, promote, sustain inclusiveness; critical Sport Management theories; stereotyping, prejudice, discrimination; and intersectional axes of inequality.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
SPMA 1P94
Professional Engagement for the Sport Industry
Introduction to communication competence and professionalism within the sport workplace.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
Note: may include a one day experiential workshop for which a fee may be charged; consult the Department. Components of this course may be taught online.
SPMA 1P97
Research Design and Evaluation
Issues concerning the construction, administration and evaluation of data collection as well as the processing and analysis of data.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
Note: labs may be taught online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 2P07, KINE 2P08 and RECL 2P07.
SPMA 2P00
Analysis of Professional Sport
Topics may include ownership, league operations, role of media, labour/management relationships, and commercial sport industry.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
Note: a field experience fee may be charged; consult the Department.
SPMA 2P06
Sport Policy
Sport policy within the Canadian sport system. Topics include government involvement in sport and policy issues.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
SPMA 2P08
Facility Management
Sport facility theory and operation emphasizing planning, assessment, and feasibility functions in commercial and public facilities.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
Note: a site visit fee may be charged; consult the Department.
SPMA 2P21
Organizational Behaviour in Sport Organizations
Behaviours of people in sport organizations. Topics may include individual (motivation, job satisfaction) and interpersonal (communication, group dynamics) processes and management functions concerning employees in sport organizations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Not open to BBA and BAcc majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OBHR 2P51 and 2P52.
SPMA 2P27
Introduction to Sport Finance
Introduction to financial principles. Topics include for-profit and non-profit budgeting, bookkeeping, financial accounting, grant applications and taxation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors. Not open to BBA and BAcc majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
SPMA 2P65
Sport Marketing
Introduction to marketing concepts and strategies utilized in the sport industry. Topics include the marketing planning process, market research and segmentation, the components of the marketing mix, and promotional and pricing concepts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors. Not open to BBA and BAcc majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and SPMA 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 3P65, MKTG 2P51, 2P52 and OEVI (MKTG) 4P92.
#SPMA 2P90
The Labour of Sport
(also offered as LABR 2P90)
Critical approach to sport as labour and professional athletes as workers. Topics may include the history of labour organizing and labour relations in professional sports, collective bargaining, strikes, and lockouts, and how axes of inequality, including race, gender, and sexuality, shape athletes' experiences of work.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of SPMA 1P91, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
SPMA 2P91
Public Relations and Communications for Sport Management
Introduction to community relations and content development for internal/external communication, emphasizing electronic, digital and social media.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P94.
SPMA 2P92
Data Management and Technology for Sport Management
Principles of big data management and database systems for managing sport information. Emphasis on the utilization of technology to integrate and implement data across sports organizations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P97.
#SPMA 2P95
Masculinities: A Feminist Perspective
(also offered as CHYS 2P95 and WGST 2P95)
Masculinities and the relation between multiple dimensions of social relations and inequalities across the lifespan: gender, race/ethnicity, class and sexual orientation. How masculinities are produced in varied sport, social, historical and cultural sites.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
SPMA 2P96
Introduction to Sport and the Law
Sport-related legal issues and concepts. Topics may include negligence and liability, risk management, violence, discrimination, doping, employment and labour law, principles of procedural fairness.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
SPMA 2P98
Sport Event Management
Examination of traditional and niche events in sport at local, provincial, national and international levels. Topics include phases in the planning model, concept of facilitation, contingency planning, environmental sustainability, bid process and the politics of events.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 3P08.
SPMA 3P05
Management Concepts in Non-profit Sport Organizations
Principles and practices of management in the non-profit sport sector. Topics may include recruiting/motivating volunteers, analysis of organization performance, grant funding, leadership and board governance.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P06.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 2P05.
SPMA 3P07
Quantitative Analysis for Sport Management
Principles and practices of planning, designing, collecting, analyzing and interpreting statistical data. Examination of descriptive and correlational analyses relevant to the sport industry.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P97 or 2P07.
Note: lab may be offered online. Students will employ computer software to answer basic and applied research questions.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 3P08 and RECL 3Q07.
SPMA 3P17
Qualitative Analysis for Sport Management
Examination of assumptions, ethical concerns, and trustworthiness as it applies to the collection and analysis of qualitative data.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P97 or 2P07.
Note: lab may be offered online. Use of interview techniques, observations, documents and visual data.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in KINE 3P18 and RECL 3Q17.
SPMA 3P21
Managing Human Resources in Sport Organizations
Theories, research and current practices emphasizing the fundamentals of managing sport employees. Topics may include job design, recruitment, interview and selection, orientation, training, and evaluation.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits. Not open to BBA and BAcc majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P21.
Note: case studies may be used to highlight selected topics.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in OBHR 2P51 and 2P52.
#SPMA 3P22
Media and Sport
(also offered as COMM 3P22 and PCUL 3P22)
Relations between sport organizations, the mass media and popular culture. Topics may include the commodification of sport, media rights, sponsorship, fan cultures, and the representation of sports in journalism and popular entertainment.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): COMM 2P98, SPMA 2P65 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA (COMM/PCUL) 2P22.
SPMA 3P25
Sport Sponsorship
Management and delivery of the sport sponsorship marketing exchange process. Topics may include branding, acquisition, pricing, assessment and evaluation principles of sponsorship.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P65 (3P65).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 4P07.
SPMA 3P26
Governance in Sport
Governance structures and processes related to policy within public, commercial and non-profit sport sectors in Canada. Emphasis on how effective governance systems can be implemented and the challenges faced by sport organizations in this process, including managing relationships with stakeholders and members.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P92.
SPMA 3P27
Advanced Sport Finance
Advanced topics in financial management, including time value of money, debt and equity financing, capital budgeting and spending earnings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors who have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits. Not open to BBA and BAcc majors.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P27.
#SPMA 3P55
The Sociology of Professional Wrestling
(also offered as SOCI 3P55)
Comprehensive and critical analysis of pro wrestling as cultural phenomenon. Topics include the history of pro wrestling; the organization of pro wrestling-national and international comparisons; occupational recruitment and retention; the business of pro wrestling multi-media complex.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 and 1P92 or SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be available on-site or online.
SPMA 3P82
Professional Preparation for Internship
Essential knowledge, skills and resources to enhance professional readiness for full-time internship experience.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average and 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P94.
Note: may be offered online or in blended format. Completion of this course with minimum 70 percent final grade is a pre-requisite for Sport Management majors planning to apply for the Sport Management Internship (SPMA 4F02).
SPMA 3P91
Sport, Discrimination and the Law
A critical examination of discrimination and human rights in sport in Canadian and international contexts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with 8.0 credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P93.
SPMA 3P92
Intellectual Property and Licencing in Sport
Identifying and protecting commercial assets of a sport organization, including copyright, trade-marks, patents and personality rights. Introduction to drafting and reviewing commercial agreements.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P96.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 3P86.
SPMA 3P93
Sport for Development
Principles and practices of sport as a development strategy to achieve broader social, education, economic, health and humanitarian goals in communities within national and international contexts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P91 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P92 (minimum 60 percent).
SPMA 3P94
Information Systems for Sport Analytics
Theory and application of systems that collectively produce analytical information. Introduction to software programming, data collection and report automation.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 1P97 (2P07).
SPMA 3P95
Sport Sales and Promotion
Comprehensive overview of strategies and techniques for promoting and selling the sport product, including sales and promotion theory, advertising, media planning and promotional applications of sport marketing.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P65 (3P65).
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 3P75.
SPMA 3P96
Globalization of Sport
Political, economic, social and cultural forces leading to the globalization of sport. Topics may include migration of athletes, sporting goods manufacturing in developing and least developed countries, global sport-media complex, international sport organizations, and the resurgence of nationalism.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P06.
Completion of this course will replace previous credit obtained in SPMA 3P06.
SPMA 3P98
Sport Event Critical Issues Management
Analysis and development of strategic solutions for issues impacting the effective implementation of major sporting events within the broader social, political, cultural, technological and economic environment in which an event is situated.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P98 (3P08).
SPMA 3P99
Special Studies in Sport Management
Directed study in specialized areas of sport management.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Note: application forms are available online at brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/sport-management/student-resources/undergraduate-programs/#1502208224283-d2980ddc-d3c7
SPMA 3V90-3V99
Special Topics in Sport Management
Practical experiences offered in specialized areas of sport management.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
SPMA 3V92
2021-2022: Canada Games Spectator Engagement
Opportunities for students to assist in facilitation/promotion of positive engagement and experience with the 2022 Canada Summer Games in the Niagara community through special events and unique initiatives.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with 8 credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P65 and SPMA 2P98.
Note: enrolment is limited. An application form will be available in advance of the term in which the course is scheduled.
SPMA 4F03
Honours Research Project
Analysis of research assumptions and methodologies in sport management, including a group research project identifying a research problem, reviewing literature and research methods completing an ethics application, collecting and analyzing data, and presenting the findings.
Lectures, seminar, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P07 (minimum of 70 percent) or 3P17 (minimum of 70 percent).
Note: interested students consult the Department. Scheduled tutorials and class meetings are held throughout the year. Students may not concurrently register in SPMA 4F01 and 4F02.
SPMA 4F04
Research Proposal
Detailed study of the literature relevant to the topic of the Honours Research Thesis, under faculty supervision.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P07 (minimum 70 percent) or 3P17 (minimum 70 percent).
Corequisite(s): SPMA 4F05.
Note: students may not concurrently register in SPMA 4F01 and 4F02.
SPMA 4F05
Honours Research Thesis
Individual research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty adviser. Topics are to be chosen in consultation with faculty willing to supervise.
Lectures, seminar, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P07 (minimum 70 percent) or 3P17 (minimum 70 percent).
Corequisite(s): SPMA 4F04.
Note: interested students consult the Department. Scheduled tutorials and class meetings are held throughout the year. Students may not concurrently register in SPMA 4F01 and 4F02.
SPMA 4P08
Sport Management Ethics
Examination of ethical theories, principles and applications, with case study analyses, and personal and professional ethical issues in sport management.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and obtained credit in KINE 4P11.
SPMA 4P09
Leadership in Sport Management
Overview and analysis of various leadership theories and their application to sport management. Topics may include leadership styles, roles, and behaviours, leadership tasks, and peer assessment of leader/follower development.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P21.
SPMA 4P10
Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Sport Organizations
Examination of the nature of innovation within sport organizations, emphasizing entrepreneurial processes and applications.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
SPMA 4P18
Sport and Social Responsibility
Examination of the relationship between the sport industry and society. Topics include corporate social responsibility, theories and frameworks, philanthropy, community investment, labour relations, human rights, environmental sustainability and governance.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
SPMA 4P25
Strategic Alliances in Sport Management
Strategic management coupled with an overview of various perspectives of interorganizational relationships.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits
SPMA 4P27
Application of Economic Principles to Financial Elements in Sport
Decision making and prioritization within the framework of economic theory applied to sport contexts. Financial topics related to supply and demand of sport companies, pricing, and the economics of traditional and alternative sport investments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P27
SPMA 4P85
Sport and the Consumer
Comprehensive analysis of the consumers of sport and the behaviours dictating their consumption of sport and sport-related goods and services. Characteristics of participants, fans, spectators, volunteers, community and corporate partners.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P65 (3P65)
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 3P85.
SPMA 4P86
Legal Drafting and Contract Analysis for Sport Management
Analysis of the structure and use of basic contracts by the sport manager including athlete agreements, contracts of employment services, sponsorship, and licensing and sale agreements.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P96.
SPMA 4P91
Power, Politics and Policy in Sport
Examination of relationships between power, politics, and policy and their relevance to sport. Topics may include race, national identity, gender, disability, sport media, event hosting, doping, gambling, violence, deviance, and health.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P06.
SPMA 4P94
Sport Analytics
Quantitative analyses and data mining methods to evaluate player performance and model game outcomes. Development, management and execution of a successful sport analytics program.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P07.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 4V94.
SPMA 4P95
Advanced Sport Marketing
Historical, contemporary and future issues and trends in sport marketing.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P65 (3P65).
SPMA 4P96
Negotiation of Deals and Disputes in Sport Organizations
Introduction to the theory, processes, and practice of negotiation. Topics may include conflict analysis; interest-based negotiation; distributive and integrative negotiations, strategies, techniques and styles; ethical considerations and dispute resolution tools.
Lectures, tutorial, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P96.
SPMA 4P97
Advanced Analysis of the Sport Industry: Hockey
Overview of hockey from historical and contemporary viewpoints. Topics may include international and domestic forums, social, ethical, political and cultural issues, and commercial influences.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
Note: a site visit fee may be charged; consult the Department. May be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 4V97.
SPMA 4P99
Advanced Special Studies in Sport Management
Advanced directed study in specialized areas of sport management.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of instructor.
Note: application forms available online at brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/sport-management/student-resources/undergraduate-programs/#1502208224283-d2980ddc-d3c7
#SPMA 4Q90
Foundations of Collaboration and Teamwork
(also offered as HLSC 4Q90, KINE 4Q90, NUSC 4Q90 and RECL 4Q90)
Core competencies for effective teamwork. Topics include collaborative leadership, team functioning, communication, role clarity, conflict management, and client-centred approach as it applies to a diversity of inter-professional settings.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA, BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate), BSc (Kin), BMED, CHLH, CMTY, MSCI, NUBR, NUSC, PHTH and RECL majors with a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
SPMA 4V90-4V99
Advanced Topics in Sport Management
Practical experiences offered in specialized areas of sport management.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
EXPERIENTIAL LEARNING COURSES
SPMA 3P02
Sport Management Field Work
Placement in an internal Brock University sport or sport-related organization. Topics surrounding preparation for professional engagement in the sport industry.
Tutorial, 2 hours alternating weeks; 80 hours field work.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P06 and 2P98 (2P05).
Note: enrolment limited. Placements will be secured by instructor. Students may not concurrently register in SPMA 4P92. Depending on the nature of the placement, a Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Students are not guaranteed the opportunity to repeat SPMA experiential courses.
SPMA 4P92
Sport Management Practicum
Field placement with sport-related groups and organizations.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment limited. Placement will be a part-time 80 hour experience during the term. Students are responsible for obtaining the placement in consultation with the instructor. Course application form available online at brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/sport-management/student-resources/experiential-education and must be submitted to instructor prior to seeking a placement. Depending upon the nature of the placement, a Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Transportation to placement is student's responsibility. Students may not concurrently register in SPMA 3P02. Students are not guaranteed the opportunity to repeat SPMA experiential courses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 4F02.
SPMA 4P93
Sport for Development Field Experience
May include planning, communication, relationship building, leadership development, program delivery and evaluation in a national or international humanitarian sport project.
Lectures, lab, fieldwork.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P93.
Note: enrolment limited. Students must complete an application and interview prior to being admitted into the course. Students must be at least 18 years of age, have a valid passport, visa and immunizations as required. Students are required to pay their own expenses. Students are not guaranteed the opportunity to repeat SPMA experiential courses. Depending upon the nature of the placement, a Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required.
SPMA 4P98
Major Games Field Course
Observation and analysis of operations of a major sport event. Topics may include marketing, human resources, sponsorship, finance, venue management and strategic alliances.
Lectures, lab, fieldwork.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 2P98 (3P08).
Note: enrolment limited. Students must complete an application and interview prior to being admitted into the course and attend an orientation session. Students must be at least 18 years of age and have a valid passport, visa and immunizations as required. Students are required to pay their own expenses. Students are not guaranteed the opportunity to repeat SPMA experiential courses. Depending upon the nature of the placement, a Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required.
INTERNSHIP COURSES
SPMA 4F01
Sport Management Internship Project
Analysis of individual internship experience (SPMA 4F02) relative to the application of selected sport management theories, concepts and practices. Project focus and format will be developed in consultation with the course instructor and student.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Corequisite(s): SPMA 4F02.
Note: enrolment limited. Students may not concurrently register in SPMA 4F03, 4F04 or 4F05. Students are not guaranteed the opportunity to repeat SPMA experiential courses. Sport Management Internship information and policies available online at brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/sport-management/student-resources/experiential-education
SPMA 4F02
Sport Management Internship
Internship in an approved sport or sport-related organization.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum 70 percent major average, a minimum of 13.0 overall credits and permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite(s): SPMA 3P82 (minimum 70 percent)
Corequisite(s): SPMA 4F01.
Note: enrolment limited. Placement will be a full-time (450hr) experience over the period of one term. Internship Intention Forms available online at brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/sport-management/student-resources/experiential-education and must be submitted no later than March 31. Students are responsible for obtaining the Internship in consultation with the instructor. Students are required to pay their own expenses. Depending upon the nature of the placement, a Police record check with a vulnerable sector screening may be required. Students are not guaranteed the opportunity to repeat SPMA experiential courses. Sport Management Internship information and policies available online at brocku.ca/applied-health-sciences/sport-management/student-resources/experiential-education. Students may not concurrently register in SPMA 4F03, 4F04 or 4F05.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPMA 4P92.
NON-CREDIT COURSE
SPMA 0N40
Experiential Preparation
Provides students with specialized knowledge, practices, culture and skills as required by host organization in preparation for a particular credit-based experience.
Lectures, presentations, workshops, site visits as required.
Restriction: open to SPMA majors with a minimum of 13.0 credits and permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online. To be run as appropriate to the needs/demands of particular experiential host organizations; not all experiential credit courses may require this course to be taken. Students are required to pay their own expenses.
Administrative Assistant
Mona Lavoie
905-688-5550, extension 4989
Academic South 455
fahs.brocku.ca/spma
The Department of Sport Management offers a four-year program leading to a Bachelor of Sport Management (BSM). The requirement for graduation with a BSM (Honours) is a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average. The requirement for graduation with a BSM is a minimum 60 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent overall average.
The program is designed to meet the needs of a rapidly expanding sport industry and incorporates experiential opportunities for students.
Students will be prepared for sport management career opportunities that include marketing, public relations, promotions, communications, human resources and financial, facility and event management in a variety of public, commercial and non-profit organizations.
It is the responsibility of Sport Management students to adhere to the Department of Sport Management's Ethical and Professional Code of Conduct which is in conjunction with Brock University's Code of Student Conduct.

80

Studies in Arts and Culture
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
#STAC 1P02
Web Media Production
(also offered as IASC 1P02)
Principles of interactive website creation and design. Formatting, lists, images, links and tables with HTML. Web colour and graphics formats. Typography and layout with CSS. Buttons, rollovers and forms with JavaScript. Usability, accessibility and interactivity. Creation of public interactive web-based projects using modern development techniques.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Note: offered online.
#STAC 1P95
Digital Foundation
(also offered as IASC 1P95 and VISA 1P95)
Technical foundations of digital images, media methods and concepts including web-based, digital photography, image processing software and printing; foundations of digital media in video, audio and computational production and post-production. Contemporary digital practices within the broader history of visual and media arts.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to STAC, COSC (single or combined), IASC (single or combined), MCMN, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours) BEd (intermediate/senior) majors.
Note: students will need additional materials. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
STAC 1P96
Language for the Arts: Introduction
Development of writing skills through the reporting of arts and culture. Examples may include photography, visual arts, new media art, performance, music, and dramatic arts.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week
Note: materials fee or event fee may be required. May be offered online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in STAC 1F98.
STAC 1P97
Language for the Arts: Interdisciplinary Approaches
Understanding interdisciplinary connections between the arts. Reporting arts and culture. Examples may include photography, visual arts, new media art, performance, music, and dramatic arts.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week
Note: materials fee or event fee may be required. May be offered online or blended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in STAC 1F98.
*STAC 1P99
The Culture of Noise
(also offered as IASC 1P99, MUSI 1P99 and VISA 1P99)
Role of noise in music, social space and art. Exploration of discursive issues concerning the value of sound studies.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours, online
STAC 2M90-2M99
Special Studies in the Fine and Performing Arts
Studies of a particular artform (dance) or of a selected area across a range of forms (arts administration).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: topics to be announced by the Centre of Studies in Arts and Culture.
#STAC 2P61
Website Creation
(also offered as APCO 2P61 and VISA 2P61)
Creative approaches to basic technical and design foundations of website design and development. Processing and management of images and other media assets, structuring websites, development tools and applications, web hosting and dissemination strategies. Contemporary web-based art practices within the broader history of cultural production.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to STAC, VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors and APCO minors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1P95 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#STAC 2P80
Italian Cinema
(also offered as ITAL 2P80)
Major film directors and cultural trends in Italian cinema. Influence of Italian film on North American. Films studied include those by  such directors as De Sica, Rossellini, Fellini, Antonioni, Bertolucci, Wertmller, Tornatore, Amelio, Moretti and Sorrentino.
Lectures, 3 hours per week, plus film lab.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian required.
*STAC 2P93
Critical Practice in the Fine and Performing Arts
(also offered as CANA 2P93, IASC 2P93 and MLLC 2P93)
Interdisciplinary approach to key ideas about music, art, dance and drama through critical readings and guided exposure to selected public fine and performing art events. Exploration of issues in aesthetics and criticism using varied theoretical approaches.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93), IASC 1F01 (1F00), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
Note: event attendance is required; events fees required. May be offered online or blended.
*STAC 2P94
Embodied Text: Art Beyond the Artifact
(also offered as CANA 2P94, IASC 2P94 and MLLC 2P94)
Functions of art and artifacts outside the conventions associated with words, texts, paintings and scores. Experiencing musical, visual, movement, and theatre vocabularies through exploration of spatial/temporal/aesthetic/embodied forms of art in performance.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of CANA 1F91, DART 1P91 and 1P92 (1F91/1F93), IASC 1F01 (1F00), MUSI 1F10, VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or permission of the Centre.
#STAC 2P96
Introductions to 3D Modelling and Animation
(also offered as COSC 2P96 and VISA 2P96)
Concepts and skills of 3D modelling and rendering using Autodesk Maya. Approaches to building models, using texturizing, lighting, cameras and renderings as well basic animation techniques. Relevant historical and theoretical perspectives on 3D and virtuality situating 3D within the creative process and broader critical practices in cultural production.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, COSC (single or combined), IASC (single or combined), VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from four COSC credits, IASC 1F01 (1F00), VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC 2P96.
#STAC 2P97
Digital Video in Contemporary Art
(also offered as IASC 2P97 and VISA 2P97)
Concepts of basic videography and its applications within conceptual and aesthetic studio practice. Camera work, composition and lighting; digital video and audio editing, special effects, composing, text and titling, and HD output. Critical analysis of recent and contemporary film and video practices.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, IASC (single or combined), VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to open to IASC (single or combined), STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from IASC 1F01 (1F00), VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Students with credit in FILM 2F98 may register. Contact Visual Arts Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#STAC 2P98
Intermedia
(also offered as IASC 2P98)
Approaches to the conceptualization and production of video, sound generation, multimedia environments, performance, interactive and installation art.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC and IASC (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the Centre for Digital Humanities.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grad and credit obtained in VISA 2P98.
#STAC 2P99
Introduction to Sound Design in Contemporary Art
(also offered as IASC 2P99 and VISA 2P99)
Approaches to the conceptualization and production of sound recording, notation, field-recording, foley arts, soundtrack production, experimental music and performance and contemporary sound art.
Lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to STAC, GAMD, IASC (single or combined), VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from IASC 1F01 (1F00), VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee may be required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Students with credit in FILM 2F98 may register. Contact Visual Arts Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#STAC 2Q90
Digital Archives: Construction, Scholarship and Functionality
(also offered as IASC 2Q90 and ITAL 2Q90)
Digital archives, their functionality, development and role in Humanities research. Sites studied will range from library collections to single authors and artist projects, including museum and audio archives. Engagement in the creation of a digital archive.
Lectures, lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian required.
#STAC 2Q95
Introduction to Interactive Media
(also offered as IASC 2Q95 and VISA 2Q95)
Concepts and creation in electronic media enabled by physical interaction between a user/viewer and a sculpture, installation, sound and video environment or wearable media. Fundamental concepts of voltage, current and resistance. Use of simple circuits, sensors and switches, software interfaces and basic microprocessors.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to STAC, IASC (single or combined), VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one of four COSC credits, two IASC credits, one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent or permission of the instructor.
Note: no previous experience in electronics required. Students might need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
STAC 3M00-3M09
Arts and Culture Studies Abroad
Unique cultural, architectural or regional setting examined through the eye of the visual and/or performing artist, critic or art historian utilizing the host country's/city's institutional resources, museums and galleries.
Restriction: permission of the Director.
Prerequisite(s): one STAC credit; one credit from DART, VISA or permission of the instructor.
for students with an interest in studio and performance and arts histories (including dramatic arts, music, visual arts).
*STAC 3P01
Media Transformations in The Creative Arts
(also offered as IASC 3P01, MLLC 3P01 and VISA 3P01)
The trajectory and influences of new media on the development of and discourses in 20th Century and contemporary creative production including the arts, broadcast, film, video, and electronic arenas such as the internet, games and interactive media. Overview of fundamental concepts, practices and language. Consideration of aesthetics, production, script and story, direction, authorship, collaborative process and distribution.
Lectures, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): two STAC, COMM, ENGL, IASC,MLLC, VISA, WRDS (WRIT) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or blended.
*STAC 3P14
Dramatic Creation for Contemporary Cultural Practice
(also offered as DART 3P14, IASC 3P14, MLLC 3P14 and VISA 3P14)
Components of dramatic story. Understanding character, dramatic action, structure, direction, improvisation, tempo, rhythm, voice and body potential. Theory and practical application in projects for creators in the arts, media and film.
Seminar, workshop 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two STAC, COMM, DART, IASC, VISA credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment limited to 20 students. Materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. May be offered online or blended.
Students will not receive earned credit for STAC 3P14 if DART 3F50, 3P53 or 3P92 have been successfully completed.
*STAC 3P41
Approaches to Curatorial Practice
(also offered as VISA 3P41)
Practical application of methodological and theoretical approaches to curating.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, one credit from second- or third-year VISA or STAC courses, or permission of the Centre.
Note: participants may be required to travel to locations other than on campus. Students may need field trip expenses, which they must supply. May be offered online or blended.
*STAC 3P42
Methods and Principles of Curating
(also offered as VISA 3P42)
Curatorial function of the museum, gallery and cultural organizations and the role of the curator in society. Critical and theoretical aspects of curating and methodological approaches to interpretation, dissemination and presentation of cultural artifacts, artworks and new forms of media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, one credit from second- or third-year VISA or STAC courses, or permission of the Centre
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. May be offered online or blended.
*STAC 3P93
Producing a Performance Event
(also offered as DART 3P93)
Functions of management: planning, organizing, leading and controlling in creation of a performance-based cultural event. Budget development, site selection and development, co-ordination of creative and production priorities, marketing, publicity and fund-raising, and analysis of measurement tools.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre.
Note: materials fee and field trip fee may be required. May be offered online or blended.
STAC 3P94
Advanced Tutorial in Studies in Arts and Culture I
Advanced study in any area of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: a written proposal must be approved by the Centre before registration. Materials fee may be required. May occur off campus. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
STAC 3P95
Advanced Tutorial in Studies in Arts and Culture II
Advanced study in any area of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: permission of a faculty supervisor.
Note: a written proposal must be approved by the Centre before registration. Materials fee may be required. May occur off campus. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*STAC 3P96
Landscape Culture
(also offered as MLLC 3P96)
Nature in the arts. Historical practice and contemporary expression in all art forms. Landscape theory, garden history, environmental art, public art and artist's gardens. Hybridization of methodologies: conceptual, horticultural, landscape design and landscape architecture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance and event fees may be required.
*STAC 3P98
Reporting Arts and Culture
(also offered as WRDS 3P98)
Contexts, genres, conventions and practices of arts journalism in Canada; critical reading of selected texts in arts journalism; practical experience researching and writing arts news, reviews, features, and publicity for print and electronic media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two credits numbered 2(alpha)00 or above in STAC, COMM, ENGL, PCUL, WRDS (WRIT) or permission of the Centre.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P98.
*STAC 3P99
Interpretive and Critical Writing in the Arts
(also offered as MLLC 3P99, VISA 3P99 and WRDS 3P99)
Principles and methodologies for the written presentation and representation of works of art, artists' practice and events within general and specific disciplinary contexts, discourses and frameworks. Examples from across the arts; practice based projects from real world events and performances. Orientation to specialized publics in print and other media.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or blended. Event attendance is required; events fees required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P99.
#STAC 3Q91
Research Seminar in Visual Art
(also offered as VISA 3Q91)
Introduction to a variety of research methods, paradigms, issues, and practical skills relevant to studio art or creative practice. Development of research-creation processes from conceptualization and literature review to presentation and communication of project outcomes.
Lectures, seminar/lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum 75 percent major average and a minimum 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, two credits from VISA 2P41, 2P50, 2P51, 2P53, 2P88, 2P90, 3P50, 3P52, 3P90, 3P91, 3P92, 3P97, 3P98, 4P90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: open to STDA, HAVC, and STAC students. Additional materials may be required, which students must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Research topics are student driven, enabling students to develop a research-creation methodology appropriate to their discipline and project in VISA 4F06, 3M90, 2F99, 3F99, curation, or independent work.
#STAC 3Q99
Advanced Sound Design
(also offered as IASC 3Q99 and VISA 3Q99)
Further develop skills acquire knowledge on the field of digital sound, focusing on recording theory, post-production techniques and presentation. Installation practices in Sound Art and use of hardware and software to create sound-based art projects.
Lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to STAC, IASC (single or combined), VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 2P99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
STAC 3V90-3V99
Special Studies in the Fine and Performing Arts
Interdisciplinary study of specific issues within the fine and performing arts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Note: topics to be announced; materials fee may be required.
STAC 3V91
Sports in Arts and Culture
Interdisciplinary approach to the representation of sports and sport events in the arts, with an emphasis on Canadian production.
Lecture, 1.5 hours in class, 1.5 hours online per week.
*STAC 4F40
Arts Management
(also offered as DART 4F40 and VISA 4F40)
Effective management of arts organizations to fulfill social and artistic mandates.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, CANA, DART (single or combined), DART (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee may be required. May be offered online or blended.
*STAC 4F41
Curatorial Studies Practicum
(also offered as VISA 4F41)
Practical application of the critical and theoretical aspects of curating. Research and organization of an exhibition from proposal, thesis, work-plan, budget, marketing and program plan to dissemination and presentation of works of art within a professional gallery.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 6 hours per week
Restriction: open to STAC, VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre.
Prerequisite(s): VISA or STAC 3P42.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
STAC 4F99
Honours Thesis
Critical, historical or creative project in the fine or performing arts of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: permission of the Director.
Note: students are urged to arrange and plan their projects in the Spring for the following year.
*STAC 4P01
Creating Social Value from Material Culture
(also offered as IASC 4P01, MLLC 4P01 and VISA 4P01)
Theory and practice of creating social value from material culture. Curatorial and interpretive practice in public institutions focusing on art, human and natural history, and science and technology. Informal learning theory, authority structures and community engagement, audience segmentation and selection, exhibit design, and collections development within social and political contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance may be required. Events fees may be required.
*STAC 4P68
Arts, Heritage and Culture: Public Policy and Planning
(also offered as CANA 4P68, DART 4P68 and VISA 4P68)
Examination of federal, provincial and municipal protocols governing heritage, fine and performing arts and Canadian cultural production. Strategies for effective engagement of policy through governance and community relations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, CANA, DART (single or combined), DART (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), VISA (single or combined), SPMA and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre.
Note: materials fee may be required. May be offered online or blended.
*STAC 4P72
High and Low Art: Intersections, Exchanges and Flows
(also offered as IASC 4P72, MLLC 4P72 and VISA 4P72)
The exchange between high art and entertainment, considering intertextuality and cultural appropriation; the changing role of museums and community-based arts; and the migration of values and tastes between market-driven and not-for-profit cultural outcomes.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 12.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance is required; event fees required. May be offered online or blended.
STAC 4V70-4V79
Advanced Studies in Arts and Culture
Administrative Assistant
Erin McArdle
Marilyn I. Walker 337A
The Centre for Studies in Arts and Culture, part of the Marilyn I. Walker School of Fine and Performing Arts, is designed for students who wish to gain a critical view as well as experiential knowledge of contemporary culture from the perspectives of observer, creator, performer or cultural agent.
Our aim is to contribute to the vitality of the arts by developing informed audiences, practitioners or critics who are engaged by interdisciplinary practices and discourses in creative work, whether dance, video, music, theatre or the visual arts. The Centre for Studies in Arts and Culture is dedicated to developing a context in which the contemporary artist, performer, critic, curator or cultural agent can examine pragmatic and theoretical approaches to understanding the creative process and its cultural implications.
In consultation with the Director, students are encouraged to organize their program of study around one of the following emphases: arts and cultural management, intermedia and interdisciplinarity, and cultural critique and agency.
As part of their Studies in Arts and Culture Honours degree program, students may complete a Concentration in Cultural Management offered in co-operation with the Faculty of Business, a Concentration in Languages, Arts and Cultures in co-operation with the Department of Modern Languages, Literatures and Cultures or a Concentration in Cultural Transmission and Heritage Studies in co-operation with the Department of History and the Department of Geography and Tourism Studies.
Students intending to work in the public sector for culture in Canada are encouraged to have a working facility in the other official language.

81

Tourism Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
TOURISM STUDIES COURSES
TOUR 1P91
Introduction to Tourism
Understanding the fundamental principles and theories of tourism including scope, demand, supply, destination and visitor management, and socio-cultural, environmental and economic impacts of tourism in the context of sustainable tourism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TREN 1F90 and TMGT (TREN) 1P91.
TOUR 1P92
Tourism Industry Sectors
Understanding the structure, nature, and operations of key tourism industry sectors in the context of the principles of sustainability.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TREN 1F90, 2P11 and TMGT (TREN) 1P92.
#TOUR 2P07
Introduction to Geospatial Technologies
(also offered as ERSC 2P07, GEOG 2P07 and IASC 2P07)
Concepts and applications of geographic information systems (GIS), global positioning systems (GPS) and remote sensing. Properties of digital maps, airborne data and satellite imagery. Principles of map compilation and design. Practical experience in computer mapping, image interpretation in GIS analysis.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
#TOUR 2P13
Resource and Environmental Geographies
(also offered as GEOG 2P13)
Analysis of the relation between resources, global environmental dynamics, and the management of uncertainty. Emphasis on the changing pattern of energy flows.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 1P91 and 1P92, GEOG 1F90, 1F91, ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01) (1F90), (INTC 1F90) or permission of the instructor.
#TOUR 2P21
Introduction to Research Design and Methodology
(also offered as GEOG 2P21)
Concepts related to research design. Properties of knowledge, preparing for research, describing and interpreting data.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 1P91 and 1P92 (TREN 1F90), GEOG 1F90, 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
#TOUR 2P28
Economics of the Environment
(also offered as ECON 2P28)
Economic perspectives on environmental and natural resource issues. Topics may include valuing environment improvements, population growth issues, sustainable development, forestry and fishery management, ozone depletion and climate change.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to TMGT and TREN majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P28.
*TOUR 2P30
Culture, Heritage and Tourism
(also offered as GEOG 2P30)
Principles of preservation, conservation, and management of built and cultural resources for heritage tourism destinations on a variety of scales from World Heritage Sites to local heritage and including indigenous cultural tourism attractions. Regional identities and environments, and the importance of small and medium sized enterprises.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of TOUR 1P91, 1P92, GEOG 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P10.
TOUR 2P31
Tourist Behaviour
Socio-cultural dimensions of tourists and tourists' behaviours during the process of taking a holiday. Issues of motivation, social role and attitudes in tourist settings, including indigenous cultural heritage attractions. Ethical and delinquent behaviours, host and guest relations, typology of tourists, and decision-making processes.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): TOUR 1P91, 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P12.
TOUR 2P32
Nature-based Tourism
Emergence and global importance of nature-based tourism as a global phenomenon, Emphasis on different forms of nature-based tourism in reference to sustainability and other forms of alternative tourism, including definition, impacts, policy, tour operation, ethics, development, and marketing.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): TOUR 1P91, 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P26.
*TOUR 2P33
Sustainable Integrated Waste Management
(also offered as GEOG 2P33)
Waste reduction, reuse and recycling and environmentally sensible design. Waste auditing, optimal materials use and life cycle analysis. Sewage treatment technologies. Composting for managing organic waste and sewage. Tourism and waste management on land, on the water and in the air; managing wastes in remote and environmentally sensitive areas, camps and resorts. Policy, legislation and case studies.
Lectures, seminar, workshop, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of TOUR 1P91, 1P92, GEOG 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2P93.
TOUR 2P34
Strategic Management for Tourism
Strategic management theories, tools and methods as applied to organizations in the tourism sector. Topics include strategy formulation and implementation, mission and vision statements, micro environmental and macro environmental analysis, core competences and value chain, SWOT analysis, competitive strategy, differentiation and low cost strategies, mergers, acquisitions and strategic alliances in tourism and hospitality sectors.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): TOUR 1P91, 1P92 or permission of the instructor.
*TOUR 2P36
Human Rights, Geography and Development
(also offered as GEOG 2P36)
Concept of Human Rights, civil and political rights in different geographic environments. Topics may include theories of rights, equity and freedom; the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International Bill of Rights; rights and equity issues in development, mobility, displacement and the environment.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: offered online.
*TOUR 2P94
Human-Dominated Ecosystems
(also offered as GEOG 2P94)
Human impacts in natural and built ecosystems from local to global scales. Key environmental issues, principles, policy options, problem solving and possibilities for creative planned change. Local examples from the Greenbelt and Niagara.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 1P91 and 1P92 (1F90), GEOG 1F90, 1F91 or permission of the instructor.
Note: the majority of classroom lectures will be replaced by 3-4 full-day field programs within the Niagara Region on Saturdays and Sundays in September and October; final scheduling details to be determined in consultation with students. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TREN 2P16 and TMGT (TREN) 2P94.
#TOUR 3F90
London Field Course
(also offered as GEOG 3F90)
Growth and development of London as a global city, capital of Britain, major metropolitan area and important tourist destination. Examination of its major functions, institutions, peoples and internal spatial structures. Major planning issues involved in achieving an enriched urban environment.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits, two GEOG credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3F92.
*TOUR 3F97
Tourism Field Course
(also offered as GEOG 3F97)
Intensive field course with relevance to tourism studies and geography.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3F70.
#TOUR 3P21
Qualitative Research Design and Methodology
(also offered as GEOG 3P21)
Aspects of qualitative research: project formulation, methodologies, writing-up; relation of theory and methodology.
Lectures, seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 2P10.
#TOUR 3P22
Quantitative Research Design and Methodology
(also offered as GEOG 3P22)
Geographical concepts and applications of descriptive and inferential statistics. Use of measures of central tendency, hypothesis testing (t-test and ANOVA), regression analysis, non-parametric tests, spatial statistics and use of geographic information systems (GIS).
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): TOUR (TMGT/TREN) 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
Students will not receive earned credit for TOUR 3P22 if MATH/STAT 1F92 has been successfully completed. Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 2P11, 2P12 and MATH/STAT 1P98.
*TOUR 3P30
Tourism Planning and Development
(also offered as GEOG 3P30)
Role and function of tourism policy and planning. Planning and development of tourism resorts, attractions, tourism sites and regional economies through tourism; consideration of regional, provincial and national developments.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P10.
TOUR 3P31
International Tourism
Changes in power relations, environment, society, culture and economy through the globalization of tourism. Security issues, human rights and inequality in international tourism.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P11 and INTC 3P31.
TOUR 3P32
Evolution of Tourism in Niagara
Overview of historical patterns of tourism in the Niagara Peninsula from the arrival of European settlers. Temporal and spatial changes in tourism destinations. Importance of commercial and noncommercial attractions in Niagara tourism. Anchor attractions. Evolution of tourist facilities in different tourism sectors. Tourism-mediated human impacts in natural and built ecosystems from local to global scales. Policy options, problem solving and possibilities for creative planned change. Local examples from the Niagara peninsula.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week for part of the term.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: the majority of classroom lectures will be replaced by 3-4 full-day field programs within the Niagara Region on Saturdays and Sundays in September and October (final scheduling details to be determined in consultation with class members). Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
TOUR 3P33
Tourism in Parks and Protected Areas
Broad survey of the many different types of protected areas at international, national, state, and local levels. How preservation and conservation initiatives are both challenged and aided by park use.
Lectures, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*TOUR 3P34
Sustainable Transportation
(also offered as GEOG 3P34)
Interdisciplinary survey of the environmental, cultural, social and economic effects of automobiles, airplanes, trains and watercraft in built and natural environments. Impacts of tourist mobility. Principles, policies, and planning for sustainable transportation.
Lectures, seminar, workshop, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (GEOG/TREN) 3P18.
TOUR 3P35
Tourism Ethics
Application of ethical theory to different tourism phenomena (e.g., sex tourism, cruise line tourism, aspects of underdevelopment, slum tourism, corporate social responsibility) in the context of socio-cultural, economic, and ecological impacts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 4P15.
TOUR 3P36
Operations Management for Tourism
Examination of concepts and techniques necessary for designing, managing, and improving service operations in tourism. Topics include service design, planning and delivery, quality management, facility layout and location decisions, capacity planning, waiting line models, supply chain management and project management.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
*TOUR 3P37
Croatia Field Course
(also offered as GEOG 3P37)
Intensive field course of relevance to tourism studies and geography.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P70 and 3P71.
#TOUR 3P50
Resource Management: Discourses, Policies and Ethics
(also offered as GEOG 3P50)
Ethical and political implications of competing discourses of both human and natural resource management. Emphasis on the production and uses of power from the level of individual leadership and network-building to that of the global governance of resources.
Lectures/ seminar, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): TOUR 2P13 or permission of the instructor.
#TOUR 3P57
Human Geography and Tourism Studies Field Course
(also offered as GEOG 3P57)
Application of geographical principles and field techniques to problems in human geography and tourism studies.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): completion of Year 2 TOUR requirements in the BA Tourism Studies programs or completion of Year 2 GEOG requirements in the BA GEOG (single or combined) programs.
Note: field work in October in the week following Thanksgiving Day. Students must register with the Department by April of the preceding academic year. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in GEOG 3P56.
#TOUR 3P83
Geography of Water Resources
(also offered as ERSC 3P83 and GEOG 3P83)
Physical and human factors affecting patterns of use and development of water resources. Emphasis on patterns of supply and demand, approaches to development and management of the resource, problems and alternative strategies.
Lectures, lab, 4 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of GEOG 1F90, 1F91, ERSC 1P01 and 1P02 (1F01), (1F90) or permission of the instructor.
#TOUR 3P91
Chicago Field Course
(also offered as GEOG 3P91)
Cultural and historical geographies of Chicago. Emphasis on the urban spectacle of the modern city and the contrasting geographies of race and class inequalities through the examination of public space, architecture, housing and suburbanization, cultural production and tourism.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits or two GEOG credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
TOUR 3P92
Tourism, Sex and Health
Health and wellness tourism, medical tourism, tourist's risk-taking behaviours and health issues. Sex tourism paradigms, infectious disease, issues of birth tourism and suicide tourism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 4P12.
*TOUR 3P93
Heritage Interpretation in the Digital Age
(also offered as IASC 3P93)
Use of web-based and mobile digital platforms to identify, inventory, interpret, and conserve Niagara's natural and cultural heritage. Role of environmental heritage in tourism and education.
Lectures, tutorial, workshop, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99, two IASC credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: tutorials and class meetings held throughout the term. Independent field work fieldwork for production of an online thematic interpretive resource focusing on heritage features in Niagara.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 4P19.
TOUR 3P94
Revenue Management for Tourism
Concepts, tools and techniques used to maximize revenue from fixed, perishable resources in the tourism-related industries. Topics include demand forecasting methods, role of value in pricing, price differentiation, dynamic value-based pricing, overbooking and inventory management.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: concepts are illustrated using examples from airline, hotel and cruise sectors.
TOUR 3P95
Visitor Attraction Management
Critical evaluation of principles and practices of managing visitor attractions and assessing their economic, socio-culture and environmental impacts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
TOUR 3P96
Tourism, Animals and Ethics
Historical and current practices in the use of animals in the tourism industry from both consumption and production perspectives. Examination of current animal ethics theories provides scope to determine the appropriate practices, with the aim of discussing how tourism practitioners and theorists might think about these issues in a different light.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P96.
TOUR 3P97
Culinary Tourism
Exploration of culinary tourism through culture, history, food and wine, festivals, regional identity and sustainable development and consumption of places. Creation of a culinary tourism product and marketing strategies.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 1(alpha)90 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P97.
TOUR 3Q90
Directed Readings I
Topic not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: topic must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P90.
TOUR 3Q91
Directed Readings II
Topic not covered in the Department's regular course offerings.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: topic must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 3P91.
#TOUR 3Q93
Vancouver Field Course
(also offered as GEOG 3Q93)
Cultural, historical and tourism geographies of Vancouver. Emphasis on the urban spectacle of the modern city and the contrasting geographies of race and class inequalities through the examination of public space, architecture, tourism spaces, housing and suburbanization, and cultural production.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits, two GEOG credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*TOUR 3Q97
Events Management
(also offered as COMM 3Q97 and PCUL 3Q97)
Introduction to events management. Topics include event types and contexts; conceptualization, planning and design; marketing and sponsorship; budgeting and financial management; managing human and volunteer resources; staging and logistics; risk management, evaluation and sustainability.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to TMGT, TREN, BCMN, COMM, MCMN, FILM (single or combined) and PCUL majors with a minimum of 8.0 overall credits until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): TOUR 2P31 or PCUL 2P20.
TOUR 3V90-3V95
Special Topics in Tourism
Topics selected from year to year on the basis of faculty expertise.
#TOUR 4F90
Honours Thesis
(also offered as GEOG 4F90)
Individual research project carried out under the direction of a faculty adviser.
Restriction: open to TMGT, TREN and GEOG (single or combined) majors with a minimum 75 percent in all Year 3 Geography or Tourism courses, approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Note: students contemplating a thesis must consult with a possible Faculty Supervisor in D2 of Year 3. The student must submit a detailed proposal to the possible Faculty Supervisor by March 15 of D3 of Year 3. Regulations governing the thesis may be obtained from the Administrative Co-ordinator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 4F90.
#TOUR 4F99
Honours Internship
(also offered as GEOG 4F99)
Internship on a specific geographic or tourism problem or task under either the direction of a faculty member, or in a government or private agency working under the supervision of that agency.
Internship, 8 hours per week for 15 weeks; seminar, 3 hours per week for 9 weeks.
Restriction: open to TMGT, TREN and GEOG (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department
TOUR 4P30
Themes in Tourism Development
Historical, contemporary and future themes in tourism and development theory. Implications of selecting tourism as a development strategy under various tourism development paradigms.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TREN 4P10 and TMGT (TREN) 4P90.
*TOUR 4P32
Sustainable Rural Tourism
(also offered as GEOG 4P32)
Socio-economic challenges of rural communities in developed and developing nations. Critical evaluation of rural tourism as an alternative community development tool.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN), two GEOG credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 4P17 and GEOG 4P63.
TOUR 4P33
Tourism Crisis Management
Planning and implementation of management processes of the adverse effects of crises and disasters on tourism. Focus on crisis management before, during and after the event for tourism destinations and individual tourism businesses and organizations.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
TOUR 4P34
The Business of Ecotourism
Building knowledge at the intersection of theory and practice, focusing on the construction of a comprehensive ecotourism program plan through exposure to existing ecotourism businesses.
Lectures, fieldtrip, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: experiential learning-based. Active participation on the field trip (Haliburton Sustainable Forest) is mandatory. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
TOUR 4P35
Managerial Decision Making for Tourism
Theories, concepts and tools of decision making in pursuit of organizational goals in the context of tourism industry. Topics include multiple-criteria decision making, decision making under uncertainty, decision trees and influence diagrams, biases in probability assessment, revising judgments in the light of new information, risk management, group decision-making, resource allocation problems, and scenario planning.
Lecture 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two TOUR (TMGT/TREN) credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 3(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TREN 3P95 and TMGT (TREN) 4P95.
#TOUR 4P83
Research Themes in Water Resources
(also offered as GEOG 4P83)
Major debates and conflicts over water resources and their distribution. Emphasis on patterns of supply and demand, approaches to development and management of the resource, problems, and alternative strategies.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to TMGT, TREN, GEOG (single or combined) and GEOG (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): TOUR 3P83 or permission of the instructor.
CO-OP COURSES
TOUR 0N01
Work Placement I
First co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to Tourism Management stream Co-op students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 0N01.
TOUR 0N02
Work Placement II
Second co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to Tourism Management stream Co-op students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 0N02.
TOUR 0N03
Work Placement III
Third co-op work placement (4 months) with an approved employer.
Restriction: open to Tourism Management stream Co-op students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 0N03.
TOUR 0N90
Co-op Professional Preparation
Provides students with the tools, resources and skills to maximize co-op employment and professional development opportunities.
Lectures, presentation, site visits, 1.5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to Tourism Management stream Co-op students.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 0N90.
TOUR 2C01
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration I
Provides student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to Tourism Management stream Co-op students.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2C01.
TOUR 2C02
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration II
Provides student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academics studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to Tourism Management stream Co-op students.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2C02.
TOUR 2C03
Co-op Reflective Learning and Integration III
Provides student with the opportunity to apply what they've learned in their academic studies through career-oriented work experiences at employer sites.
Restriction: open to Tourism Management stream Co-op students.
Note: students will be required to prepare learning objectives, participate in a site visit write a work term report and receive a successful work term performance evaluation.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in TMGT (TREN) 2C03.
Administrative Co-ordinator
Virginia Wagg
905-688-5550, extension 3484
Mackenzie Chown C322
brocku.ca/geotour
Brock University is an ideal location in which to engage in tourism studies. The University is uniquely positioned on the Niagara Escarpment (a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve) and is minutes away from Niagara Falls, one of the world's premier international tourism destinations. The Niagara Region is also home to more than 100 wineries and a wide variety of rural and sports tourism operations, golf courses, gaming facilities, hiking and bicycle infrastructure, and cultural and heritage attractions.
The Department of Geography and Tourism Studies offers a four-year Tourism and Environment program leading to a Bachelor of Arts degree (Honours and BA with Major) and a three-year BA Pass degree program. All Students in the program can pursue a Stream in Tourism Management.
These degrees allow students to integrate sustainability (environmental, social, economic and political) and tourism management into their programs of study. Allied with the Goodman School of Business, the Tourism Management stream offers a range of business-related courses.
Students will develop transferable skills in many important areas, including research skills, communication skills, critical thinking, problem-solving abilities, and the ability to work collaboratively with others. Students will also learn to incorporate innovative, creative and responsible opinions and perspectives into their future endeavours.
The field course TOUR 3P57 is held in October in the week following Thanksgiving Day, with seminars/labs during term. This course is mandatory for students entering year 3; prospective students must register with the Department by April of the preceding academic year.
TOUR 4F99 is a required internship course in year 4, enabling students to obtain valuable work experience while still at the University. Prospective students must register with the Department by April of the preceding academic year.
The requirement for graduation with a BA (Honours) is a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average. The requirement for graduation with a BA with Major and a BA Pass is a minimum 60 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent overall average.
Co-op Program
The Tourism Management stream Co- op program combines academic and work terms over a four year period. Students spend the first two years in an academic setting where their exposure to courses in the area of Tourism Management provides the necessary background for the first work placement. In addition to the current fees for courses in academic study terms, Tourism Management stream Co-op students are assessed an annual administration fee (see the Schedule of Fees).
Eligibility to continue in the Co-op program is based on the student's major average and non-major average. A student with a minimum 70 percent major average and a minimum 60 percent non-major average will be permitted to continue. A student with a major average lower than 70 percent will not be permitted to continue in the Tourism Management stream Co-op program, but may continue in the BA Tourism Management stream non-Co-op program. For further information, see the Co-op programs section of the Calendar and contact the Department of Geography and Tourism Studies.
All students in the Co-operative Education program are required to read, sign and adhere to the terms of the Student Regulations Waiver and Co-op Student Manual (brocku.ca/co-op/current-students/co-op-student manuals) as articulated by the Co-op Programs Office. In addition, eligibility to continue in the Co-op option is based on the student's major average and non-major average, and the ability to demonstrate the motivation and potential to pursue a professional career.
Each four-month co-operative education work term must be registered. Once students are registered in a Co-op work term, they are expected to fulfill their commitment. If the placement accepted is for more than one four-month work term, students are committed to complete all terms. Students may not withdraw from or terminate a work term without permission from the Director, Co-op Program Office.
The Tourism and Environment Co-op program designation will be awarded to those students who have successfully completed a minimum of twelve months of Co-op work experience.

82

Visual Arts
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
VISA 1P20
Investigating Photography
Photography as fine art medium emphasizing visual aesthetics and concept development. Historical and contemporary work, and concepts in photography will support studio discussions and processes. Critical analysis and photo theory.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week; field trips.
Note: students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. May be offered online, hybrid or face-to-face delivery. Field trips may be required, students are expected to pay their own expenses. Students are required to have a digital camera (point and shoot, SLR, cell phone camera). Available to non-VISA majors. Major credit will not be granted to History of Art and Visual Culture, Studio Art, and Visual Arts majors.
VISA 1P93
Introduction to Drawing
Fundamental principles of drawing. Analytic, creative and graphic notation.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 1P94
Figure Drawing
Fundamentals of drawing the figure anatomically and expressively.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent).
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
*VISA 1P95
Digital Foundation
(also offered as IASC 1P95 and STAC 1P95)
Technical foundations of digital images, media methods and concepts including web-based, digital photography, image processing software; foundations of digital media in video, audio and computational production and post-production. Contemporary digital practices within the broader history of visual and media arts.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), COSC (single or combined), IASC (single or combined), MCMN and STAC majors.
Note: students will need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
*VISA 1P96
Studio Foundation
(also offered as IASC 1P96)
Basic aesthetic and conceptual processes that underlie visual art production. Two- and three-dimensional formal principles, fundamental critical issues and stylistic/material development. Examples from historic and contemporary art practice provide context for studio projects and readings.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and IASC (single or combined) majors.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Production and Design Concentration students may register. Contact the Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#VISA 1P99
The Culture of Noise
(also offered as IASC 1P99, MUSI 1P99 and STAC 1P99)
Role of noise in music, social space and art. Exploration of discursive issues concerning the value of sound studies.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours, online.
*VISA 1Q98
Introduction to Visual Culture
(also offered as IASC 1Q98)
Overview of visual culture, its vocabulary, technologies and structures within varied cultural contexts. Problems of meaning, functions of visual culture in contemporary society, the role of galleries and museums, and the impact of imagery in advertising, popular media and consumer culture. Contemporary critical methodology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours week.
Note: no studio work. May be offered online or blended. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 1Q98.
*VISA 1Q99
Contemporary Issues in The History of Western Art
(also offered as IASC 1Q99)
Analysis of key issues in the history of Western art, including various ways of looking at the visual past and present. Focus on the visual arts from prehistory through the early 20th century.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours week.
Note: no studio work. May be offered online or blended. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 1Q99.
VISA 2F05
Introduction to Sculpture
Fundamentals of three-dimensional work: design, construction and formal analysis. Emphasizing modelling techniques and principles of assemblage including mold or form making, casting and fabrication.
Lectures, studio work, 10 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Note: offered in Spring session only. Materials fee required. Students may need additional materials which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in STAC 2F05.
VISA 2M90-2M99
Special Studies in Studio
Studies in a specialized area of the visual arts.
Lectures, studio work, field trip, 5 hours per week.
VISA 2P03
Painting Fundamentals
Fundamentals of painting: introduction to colour theory, media and methods.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor. VISA 1P93 recommended.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in VISA 2P02 and STAC 2P03.
VISA 2P04
Figurative Painting
Fundamentals of conceiving and painting the figure: introduction to the anatomic, narrative and expressive concepts of the human form.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 2P03 (2P02) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in STAC 2P04.
VISA 2P26
Photography: Camera and Darkroom Process
Fundamentals of 35mm photography: camera, exposure and processing of black and white film and basic darkroom processes. History of photography, critical analysis and photographic theory.
Lectures, lab, 5 hour per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students will need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Students should provide their own 35 mm analog (film) camera with manual and automatic settings. Limited number of loaner cameras are available. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 2P27
Introduction to Digital Photography
Principles in digital imaging: digital cameras and image capture; digital negatives; colour management; image adjustment and enhancement; and image output. History of photography, imaging and critical analysis of visual culture.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 2P26 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students will need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Students must provide their own digital camera with a mega pixel rating of 12 minimum. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 2P41
Power and Politics: Visual Culture in Early Modern Europe
European art, architecture and visual culture from the 15th to the 18th century. Role of imagery in religious contexts, exploration of the natural world, the Enlightenment and development of nation states.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and a minimum 60 percent overall average or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 2P50
Canadian Identities: Art and Visual Culture in Canada Before 1960
First Nations cultural production. Influence of French and British art on Canadian art history. Historical identity, cultural definition and ideas of nationalism in art.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: student must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and a minimum 60 percent overall average or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 2P51
Contemporary Issues in Canadian Visual Culture
Thematic explorations of art, visual culture, cultural production, museums and exhibitions in Canada from the mid 20th century through to the present day.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: student must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and a minimum 60 percent overall average or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 2P53
The History of Photography
History of photography from its inception to the present day. Emphasis on the ways in which photographs produce meaning and are mobilized as visual culture as well as analysis of contemporary art practices.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: student must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and a minimum 60 percent overall average or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*VISA 2P61
Website Creation
(also offered as APCO 2P61 and STAC 2P61)
Creative approaches to basic technical and design foundations of website design and development. Processing and management of images and other media assets, structuring websites, development tools and applications, web hosting and dissemination strategies. Contemporary web-based art practices within the broader history of cultural production.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), STAC majors and APCO minors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1P95 (minimum 60 percent) and 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 2P88
Introduction to Contemporary Art: Twenty-first Century
Thematic, contextual and critical evaluation of current trends in visual art.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: student must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and a minimum 60 percent overall average or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#VISA 2P89
Medieval Art, Architecture and Society
(also offered as MARS 2P89)
Interdisciplinary study of the inter-relation and connectedness between the arts, architecture and society in medieval Europe.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
VISA 2P90
Art in Revolution: Nineteenth-Century Visual Culture
Role and function of art and visual culture within the paradigm shifts of the modern world, its relation to politics, social, cultural and technological change. Principal movements with origins in the French Revolution and the Industrial Revolution; Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism, Impressionism and Postimpressionism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: student must have a minimum of 5.0 overall credits and a minimum 60 percent overall average or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P90.
#VISA 2P92
Early to High Renaissance Art and Architecture
(also offered as ITAL 2P92 and MARS 2P92)
Major monuments, buildings and art works of the period from several critical perspectives including the humanist influence on the arts in Florence and Rome, the issue of patronage and the question of the artist's cultural status.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, ITAL 1F90, MARS 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
VISA 2P93
Drawing III
Further investigation of drawing materials and techniques emphasizing compositional structures.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 2P94
Drawing IV
Idea development, integration of media and conceptual approaches.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
*VISA 2P96
Introduction to 3D Modelling and Animation
(also offered as COSC 2P96 and STAC 2P96)
Concepts and skills of 3D modelling and rendering using Autodesk Maya. Approaches to building models, using texturizing, lighting, cameras and rendering as well basic animation techniques. Relevant historic and theoretical perspectives on 3D and virtuality situating 3D within creative process and broader critical practices in cultural production.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), COSC (single or combined), IASC (single or combined) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), four COSC credits, IASC 1F01 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in IASC 2P96.
*VISA 2P97
Digital Video in Contemporary Art
(also offered as IASC 2P97 and STAC 2P97)
Concepts of basic videography and its applications within conceptual and aesthetic studio practice. Camerawork, composition and lighting; digital video and audio editing, special effects, composing, text and titling, and HD output. Critical analysis of recent and contemporary film and video practices.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), IASC (single or combined) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide. In Fall Term, open to open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), IASC (single or combined) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Students with credit in FILM 2F98 may register. Contact Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
*VISA 2P99
Introduction to Sound Design in Contemporary Art
(also offered as IASC 2P99 and STAC 2P99)
Approaches to the conceptualization and production of sound recording, notation, field-recording, Foley arts, soundtrack production, experimental music and performance and contemporary sound art.
Lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and GAMD majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), GAMD, IASC (single or combined) and STAC majors.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), IASC 1F01 (1F00) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fees may be required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Students with credit in FILM 2F98 may register. Contact Department. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
*VISA 2Q95
Introduction to Interactive Media
(also offered as IASC 2Q95 and STAC 2Q95)
Concepts and creation in electronic media enabled by physical interaction between a user/viewer and a sculpture, installation, sound and video environment or wearable media. Fundamental concepts of voltage, current and resistance. Use of simple circuits, sensors and switches, software interfaces and basic microprocessors.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), IASC (single or combined) and STAC majors.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1P93 (minimum 60 percent), 1P94 (minimum 60 percent), 1P95 (minimum 60 percent), 1P96 (minimum 60 percent), four COSC credits, two IASC credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: no previous experience in electronics required. Students might need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 1P95 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#VISA 2Q96
Art of Activism: Sexuality to Racial Justice
(also offered as COMM 2Q96, FILM 2Q96, PCUL 2Q96 and WGST 2Q96)
Introduction to the ways marginalized and criminalized populations employ the arts of social change. Topics may include feminist activism, migrant rights, defunding the police and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Artists, film makers and activists in Canada will be featured.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
VISA 2Q97
Digital Video for Game Applications
Concepts of basic videography and its applications within conceptual and aesthetic studio practice. Camerawork, composition and lighting; digital video and audio editing, special effects, composing, text and titling, and HD output. Critical analysis of recent and contemporary film and video practices.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1P04 AND 1P05.
Note: material fees required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#VISA 2Q98
The Philosophy of Art
(also offered as PHIL 2Q98)
Classical theories of art through analysis of painting, photography, video, film, music and drama examining concepts such as beauty, creativity, artistic intention, perception, interpretation, and the nature and possible role of art.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, one PHIL credit or permission of the instructor.
VISA 2Q99
Sound Design for Game Applications
Game sound development. Topics include the use of sound effects libraries, Foley and voiceover recording techniques, idiomatic music, and interactive art. Introduction to the application of studio effects, sound manipulation and editing through DAW software.
Lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to GAMD majors.
Prerequisite(s): IASC 1P04 and 1P05.
Note: material fees may be required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#VISA 3F50
Reading the Italian Medieval & Renaissance City
(also offered as HIST 3F50, ITAL 3F50 and MARS 3F50)
Exploring key monuments, churches, museums and urban sites. Concept of the city as expressed through art, literature and architecture from Medieval to Baroque times. Historical and geographical influences and factors in shaping the city, its culture and traditions. Cities include Rome, Assisi, Siena and Florence.
Prerequisite(s): one VISA, HIST, ITAL or MARS credit or permission of the Italian Studies course co-ordinator.
Note: given in English. No knowledge of Italian is needed. Course begins in May on campus during the Spring Evening session. Departure for Italy: end of May-beginning of June for a 2-week study tour of Rome, Assisi, Florence and Siena. Students are responsible for travel, accommodation and other expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in VISA (ITAL) 2F99 and VISA (ITAL/MARS) 3M50.
VISA 3F91
Advanced Art Practice
Artistic research and creation from the perspective of project oriented, independent production. Development of artistic practices emphasizing concept to realization processes.
Lecture, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors with a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the Department.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in VISA 3M90.
VISA 3F99
Honours Tutorial
Advanced study in an area of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 75 percent major average, a minimum 12.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: a written proposal, normally submitted in May of each year, must be approved by the Department before registration.
VISA 3M00-3M04
Special Studies in Art History
VISA 3M05-3M10
Art Studies Abroad
Unique cultural, architectural or regional setting examined through the eye of the visual artist, critic or art historian utilizing the host country's institutional resources, museums and galleries. For students with an interest in both studio and art history.
Restriction: permission of the Chair.
Prerequisite(s): one VISA credit or permission of the instructor.
#VISA 3M20-3M29
Study in Mediterranean Lands
(also offered as CLAS 3M20-3M29)
Topographical investigations of ancient sites and monuments. Study tours of the great cities and museums of the Mediterranean world emphasizing the art and architecture of the Prehistoric, Classical and later periods.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: offered in the Spring or Summer Session for three or four weeks of intensive study abroad. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3M50-3M55
Travel and Study in Italy
Exploring cultural, historical, geographical and regional traditions of Italy.
Restriction: permission of the Department.
Note: offered in Italy during Spring/Summer session. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3M90-3M95
Special Studies in Visual Arts
Studies that combine theory and studio.
#VISA 3P01
Media Transformations in The Creative Arts
(also offered as IASC 3P01, MLLC 3P01 and STAC 3P01)
The trajectory and influences of new media on the development of and discourses in 20th Century and contemporary creative production including the arts, broadcast, film, video, and electronic arenas such as the internet, games and interactive media. Overview of fundamental concepts, practices and language. Consideration of aesthetics, production, script and story, direction, authorship, collaborative process and distribution.
Lectures, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): two VISA, COMM, ENGL, IASC, STAC, WRDS (WRIT) credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: May be offered online or blended.
VISA 3P03
Intermediate Painting
Painting techniques emphasizing compositional, formal and graphic elements.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 2P04 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 3P04
Painting Concepts
Conceptual development, synthesis and integration of media emphasizing contemporary approaches and practices.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 3P03 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 3P05
The European Avant-Garde: 1905-1970
Contextual analysis of the European and Russian avant-garde movements in art, design and architecture, emphasizing principal artists, theoretical or primary documents and the critical reaction.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent) and 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3P06
The American Avant-Garde: 1912-1970
From the Armory Show to the European influence on American art and photography of the Early Century, the International Style in architecture, to the emergence of the New York school, the Pop movement, Minimalism and conceptual art, and their hold on the art and culture of the 60s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent) and 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
*VISA 3P08
Gender and Art
(also offered as WGST 3P08)
Gender and identity politics in art and visual culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent) and 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in STAC 3P08.
*VISA 3P10
Advanced Video Art
(also offered as IASC 3P10)
Creative, technical, and critical skills for video art production, post-production and critical evaluation. Through creative projects, critiques, screenings, readings, lectures and discussions, students will be introduced to a variety of forms and approaches to video art, emphasizing creating video art and its contextualization in contemporary art discourses.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until the date specified in the Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): two VISA, IASC credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: completion of VISA 1P95 recommended. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Students may need field trip expenses which they must supply. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
#VISA 3P14
Dramatic Creation for Contemporary Cultural Practice
(also offered as DART 3P14, IASC 3P14, MLLC 3P14 and STAC 3P14)
Components of dramatic story. Understanding character, dramatic action, structure, direction, improvisation, tempo, rhythm, voice and body potential. Theory and practical application in projects for creators in the arts, media and film.
Seminar, workshop 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): two STAC, COMM, DART, IASC, VISA credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: enrolment limited to 20 students. Materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. May be offered online or blended.
Students will not receive earned credit for VISA 3P14 if DART 3F50, 3P53 or 3P92 have been successfully completed.
#VISA 3P22
Art and Architecture of the Roman Republic and Early Empire
(also offered as CLAS 3P22 and ITAL 3P22)
Art and architecture of the cultures of the Italian peninsula, in the first millennium BC, within the framework of cultural change and external influences.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or CLAS recommended.
#VISA 3P23
Art and Architecture of the Roman Empire
(also offered as CLAS 3P23 and ITAL 3P23)
Roman art and architecture from Augustus to Late Antiquity. Christian art and architecture and the influence of Roman aesthetics on the Renaissance and beyond.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or CLAS recommended.
#VISA 3P24
Art and Architecture of Early Greece
(also offered as CLAS 3P24)
Greek art and architecture from the end of the Bronze age through the end of the Archaic period within the framework of historical and cultural change.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or CLAS recommended.
#VISA 3P25
Art and Architecture of Classical Greece and the Hellenistic World
(also offered as CLAS 3P25)
Greek art and architecture from the early Classical era through the Hellenistic period within the framework of historical and cultural change.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: one credit from VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 or CLAS recommended.
VISA 3P26
Intermediate Darkroom Photography
Continuation of analogue processes and techniques, emphasizing historic and contemporary modes of image capture. History of photography, critical analysis and photographic theory.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 2P26 or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.Students are advised to provide their own 35 mm analog (film) camera with manual settings. Limited number of loaner cameras are available.
#VISA 3P41
Approaches to Curatorial Practice
(also offered as STAC 3P41)
Practical application of methodological and theoretical approaches to curating.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99; one credit from second or third-year VISA or STAC courses or permission of the Centre.
Note: participants may be required to travel to locations other than on campus. Students may need field trip expenses, which they must supply. May be offered online or blended.
#VISA 3P42
Methods and Principles of Curating
(also offered as STAC 3P42)
Curatorial function of the museum, gallery and cultural organizations and the role of the curator in society. Critical and theoretical aspects of curating and methodological approaches to interpretation, dissemination and presentation of cultural artifacts, artworks and new forms of media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99; one credit from second or third-year VISA or STAC courses, or permission of the Centre.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. May be offered online or blended.
VISA 3P50
Ecologies of Space
How we influence our environments, adapt to and utilize space; their cultural and social meanings; aesthetic, human or political implications; significance of built environments, architecture's role and public spaces; de-featured or non-spaces; natural habitats and representations of the natural; the artist's contribution to the evolution of postmodern geographies and monumental or site-specific space.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99; one History of Art and Visual Culture credit or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3P52
Visual Culture and Science
Thematic explorations of the relations that exist between science and visual culture both in contemporary culture and in previous eras.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent) and 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3P90
Readings in Contemporary Art I: 1970-2000
Advanced seminar, emphasizing what constitutes the paradigm shift from Late Modernism to Postmodernism.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99; two History of Art and Visual Culture credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: required for all VISA (single) Honours students. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3P91
Readings in Contemporary Art II: Art Now
Current trends in the production, reception and interpretation of art and discursive approaches to contemporary issues including the critical text, theoretical and cultural readings.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 3P90.
Note: required for all VISA (single) Honours students. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3P92
Imitation in Art and Culture
History and theory of imitation in Western Art and visual culture from Plato to postmodernism.
Lectures, seminar 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent) and 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 3P92 and STAC 3P92.
VISA 3P93
Expressive Drawing
Advanced drawing as a means of expressing personal and subjective imagery.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): four VISA studio credits (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. VISA 2P94 recommended. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 3P94
Contemporary Drawing
Advanced drawing which questions the boundaries of media, process and creative expression.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): four VISA studio credits (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students might need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 3P95
Introduction to Animation
Individual creative digital and analog animation projects. Critical knowledge of the history of animation within Visual Art, its historical developments and major practitioners. Demonstrations and exercises in techniques including direct animation, stop motion, cutout, silhouette, puppet, Claymation, rotoscoping, etc.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1P95, 2P93 and 2P94 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students will need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 3P97
Appropriation in Art and Culture
Authorship and appropriation in art and visual culture. Topics include the historical development of the notions of the artist, copyright and plagiarism, quotation, parody and intertextuality, the role of found objects, collage and montage, and the significance of digital technologies. Historical and contemporary examples from a wide range of media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent) and VISA 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 3P97 and STAC 3P97.
VISA 3P98
Special Studies in Visual Culture: Picturing Animals
Representations of non-human animals in Western art and visual culture. Case studies in such areas as interspecies collaboration, scientific representation and technologies of image-making.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent), 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) and one History of Art and Visual Culture credit or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#VISA 3P99
Interpretive and Critical Writing in the Arts
(also offered as MLLC 3P99, STAC 3P99 and WRDS 3P99)
Principles and methodologies for the written presentation and representation of works of art, artists' practice and events within general and specific disciplinary contexts, discourses and frameworks. Examples from across the arts; practice-based projects from real world events and performances. Orientation to specialized publics in print and other media.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or blended. Event attendance is required; events fees required.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WRIT 3P99.
*VISA 3Q91
Research Seminar in Visual Art
(also offered as STAC 3Q91)
Introduction to a variety of research methods, paradigms, issues, and practical skills relevant to studio art or creative practice. Development of research-creation processes from conceptualization and literature review to presentation and communication of project outcomes.
Lectures, seminar/lab, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours) BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum 75 percent major average and a minimum 9.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98, 1Q99 and two credits from VISA 2P41, 2P50, 2P51, 2P53, 2P88, 2P90, 3P50, 3P52, 3P90, 3P91, 3P92, 3P97, 3P98, 4P90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: open to STDA, HAVC, and STAC students. Additional materials may be required, which students must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Research topics are student driven, enabling students to develop a research-creation methodology appropriate to their discipline and project in VISA 4F06, 3M90, 2F99, 3F99, curation, or independent work.
VISA 3Q92
Professional Practice Methodologies
Professional art practices and technologies for artists, curators, and cultural industry professionals. Understanding contemporary art institutions, creating art documentation, portfolio strategies, writing artists'/exhibition statements and cv, proposal and grant writing, professional networking, and an introduction to commercial representation.
Lectures, seminar, experiential learning activities, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): two studio credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 3Q97
Advanced Photographic Processes
Contemporary methodologies, material experimentation and critical approaches to analogue and digital photographic production. History of photography, critical analysis and photographic theory.
Lectures, lab, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 2P26, 2P27 or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Students are advised to provide their own 35 mm analog (film) camera with manual settings and/or digital SLR camera with a megapixel rating of 12 minimum. Limited number of loaner cameras are available. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
*VISA 3Q99
Advanced Sound Design
(also offered as IASC 3Q99 and STAC 3Q99)
Further develop skills and acquire knowledge on the field of digital sound, focusing on recording theory, post-production techniques and presentation. Students will also learn about installation practices in Sound Art and the use of hardware and software to create sound-based art projects.
Lab, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single or combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to VISA (single or combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), IASC (single or combined) and STAC majors.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 2P99 or permission of the instructor.
Note: material fees required. Students may need additional materials and equipment, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 3V30-3V39
Selected Topics in Visual Arts
Selected issues in Visual Arts.
VISA 3V90-3V94
Selected Topics in Visual Arts
Selected issues in art.
VISA 3V95-3V99
Special Studies in Visual Culture
VISA 3V99
2020-2021: Visual Culture of the Apocalypse
Representations of apocalypse in art and visual culture. Topics may include pandemic imagery, climate change, and global religious traditions. Historical and contemporary examples from a variety of contexts.
Seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99; two History of Art and Visual Culture credits or permission of the instructor.
VISA 4F06
Honours Studio
Advanced independent studio practice pursuing in-depth exploration of theoretical and methodological approaches to creation resulting in a critically engaged sustained body of work for public professional exhibition.
Studio work, 5 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 75 percent major average, minimum 15.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Corequisite(s): VISA 3Q91.
Note: enrolment may be restricted due to limitations of honours studio space. A written proposal, normally submitted in May of each year, must be approved by the Department before registration. Honours standing in VISA is required. Students will need additional materials which they must supply. Field trips may be required and are organized outside regular course meeting time. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#VISA 4F40
Arts Management
(also offered as DART 4F40 and STAC 4F40)
Effective management of arts organizations to fulfill social and artistic mandates.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to VISA (single and combined), VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), CANA, DART (single and combined), DART (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and STAC majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: materials fee may be required. May be offered online or blended.
#VISA 4F41
Curatorial Studies Practicum
(also offered as STAC 4F41)
Practical application of the critical and theoretical aspects of curating. Research and organization of an exhibition from proposal, thesis, work-plan, budget, marketing and program plan to dissemination and presentation of works of art within a professional gallery.
Lectures, seminar, lab, 6 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, VISA (single and combined) and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) until date specified in registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre.
Prerequisite(s): STAC or VISA 3P42.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
VISA 4F99
Honours Thesis
Critical, historical or creative project in the visual arts of mutual interest to the student and the instructor.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 75 percent major average, a minimum 15.0 overall credits and permission of the Department.
Note: projects must be arranged in the Spring for the following year. A written proposal, normally submitted in May of each year, must be approved by the Department before registration. Honours standing in VISA is required.
#VISA 4P01
Creating Social Value from Material Culture
(also offered as IASC 4P01, MLLC 4P01 and STAC 4P01)
Theory and practice of creating social value from material culture. Curatorial and interpretive practice in public institutions focusing on art, human and natural history, and science and technology. Informal learning theory, authority structures and community engagement, audience segmentation and selection, exhibit design, and collections development within social and political contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance may be required. Events fees may be required.
VISA 4P03
Advanced Painting
Contemporary painting strategies and their dominant critiques. Readings in contemporary practice.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 3P03.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
VISA 4P04
Contemporary Painting
Creation of a body of paintings that reflect the inter-relationships among critical strategies, personal mythologies, process and meaning.
Lectures, studio work, 5 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 4P03.
Note: materials fee required. Students may need additional materials, which they must supply. Field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses. Due to space limitations, audits are not permitted in studio classes.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in VISA 3P96.
#VISA 4P68
Arts, Heritage and Culture: Public Policy and Governance
(also offered as CANA 4P68, DART 4P68 and STAC 4P68)
Examination of federal, provincial and municipal protocols governing heritage, fine and performing arts organizations and Canadian cultural production. Strategies for effective engagement of policy and planning through governance and community relations.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to STAC, CANA, DART (single or combined), DART (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), VISA (single or combined), SPMA and VISA (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or permission of the Centre for Studies in Arts and Culture.
Note: materials fee may be required. May be offered online or blended.
#VISA 4P72
High and Low Art: Intersections, Exchanges and Flows
(also offered as IASC 4P72, MLLC 4P72 and STAC 4P72)
The exchange between high art and entertainment, considering intertextuality and cultural appropriation; the changing role of museums and community-based arts; and the migration of values and tastes between market-driven and not-for-profit cultural outcomes.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 14.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Note: event attendance is required; event fees required. May be offered online or blended.
VISA 4P90
Forbidden Knowledge, Dangerous Art
Works of art and other cultural objects that were banned or challenged for religious, moral or political reasons.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 (minimum 60 percent) and VISA 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: students may need field trip expenses which they must supply.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in LART 4P90 and STAC 4P90.
#VISA 4V30-4V39
Special topics in Mediterranean Art and Architecture
(also offered as CLAS 4V30-4V39)
Selected topics and problems in current art historical and archaeological research pertaining to the art and architecture of the ancient Greek or Roman world.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit from VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99, VISA 2P41, 2P92, 3P22, 3P23, 3P24, 3P25, 3P52, CLAS 2P32, 2P34, 3V30-3V39 or permission of the Department.
#VISA 4V39
2021-2022: Art and Architecture of Greek Colonization
(also offered as CLAS 4V49)
Archaeological remains of Greek and Punic colonies in the western Mediterranean, primarily during the eighth to fifth centuries BCE.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one credit fromCLAS 2P32,2P34,3P22,3P23,3P24,3P25,3V30-3V39,VISA 1Q98and1Q99,VISA 2P41, (2P52),2P92or permission of the Department.
VISA 4V70-4V79
Advanced Studies in Visual Culture
Administrative Assistant
Monika Lederich
905-688-5550, extension 3214
Marilyn I. Walker 328
brocku.ca/visualarts
The Department of Visual Arts, part of the Marilyn I. Walker School of Fine and Performing Arts, is concerned with the nature, function and history of visual arts, from the classics to popular culture, from ancient drawings and rituals to the avant-garde. Through critical analysis of classic works and personal creative development, the student will gain an awareness of the ways in which artistic media function. Our aim is to contribute to the vitality of the arts by developing sensitive, creative and articulate artists, teachers, audiences and graduates who are disciplined and adaptable, with both research skills and experience in studio practice.
The Visual Arts program consists of courses in studio and in the history of art and visual culture. In both cases, our courses provide a practical and critical understanding of the visual arts emphasizing personal development. To this end students are introduced to a range of historical, theoretical and critical approaches to art-making and to the investigation of cultural documents. Students are encouraged to extend their experience through exposure to events sponsored by the Department of Visual Arts and the Marilyn I. Walker School of Fine and Performing Arts. Students are also offered opportunities to visit galleries and exhibitions through field trips organized by the Department of Visual Arts or in the context of specific course curriculum.
Students may take their degree in either History of Art and Visual Culture or Studio Art.
Studio activities that include intuitive, analytical and conceptual approaches are designed with the aspirations of the student artist in mind. Options are encouraged in the studio with introductory or advanced courses in drawing, painting and interdisciplinary workshops; additional courses in sculpture, photography and digital media broaden the experience and introduce the photographic, video or electronic medium to students. Student learning is facilitated by artist-teachers who have professional experience and standing in the disciplines they teach.
History of Art and Visual Culture courses examine the development of artistic styles as well as the critical and aesthetic issues that these styles bring into play. Major artists and movements are related to their cultural contexts and artistic traditions with the goal of developing critical as well as aesthetic acumen. With the choice of a Major or Minor in the History of Art and Visual Culture, students can explore the cultural, theoretical or practical methods involving the interpretation or exhibition of works of art.
The BSc (Honours) in Computer Science and Visual Arts program is tailored to students who may be interested in career paths in software development and digital media. The degree gives a solid foundation in computer technology and software science, as well as essential foundations in visual arts, emphasizing digital media.
Enrolment in most studio courses is limited to between 15 and 18 students, depending upon the course. VISA 4F06 is restricted to 8 students due to space limitations.

83

Women's and Gender Studies
Students must check to ensure that prerequisites are met. Students may be deregistered, at the request of the instructor, from any course for which prerequisites and/or restrictions have not been met.
WGST 1F90
Introduction to Women's and Gender Studies
Overview of sociocultural, political, and theoretical approaches to, and historical and philosophical foundations of the gendered experience.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#WGST 2F14
Decolonizing Indigenous Women's Identities
(also offered as INDG 2F14 and SOCI 2F14)
Indigenous women's identities from social, cultural and political perspectives emphasizing culture, tradition and spirituality.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2F14.
WGST 2P00
Classic and Contemporary Discourses in Women's and Gender Studies
Issues-based approach to the gender-intersected character of society and culture within a variety of feminist theoretical frameworks.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
#WGST 2P17
Reclaiming Indigenous Women's Literary Traditions
(also offered as INDG 2P17)
Indigenous women's literature and the stories embedded within the literature as they apply to Indigenous women's histories. Emphasis on decolonizing, reclaiming and strategies of resistance through writing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to ABWC students until date specified in Registration guide.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 2P17.
#WGST 2P20
Sexualities and Society
(also offered as CRIM 2P20 and SOCI 2P20)
Topics may include the structuring of sexual identities, sexuality and inequality, legal and social regulation of sexuality, and social justice issues.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or SOCI 1F90.
#WGST 2P21
Sociology of Families
(also offered as SOCI 2P21)
Sociological approaches to families as sites of social reproduction. Topics may include Canadian and global perspectives on gender and generation in family life, families and inequality, family-based state and legal regulation, families and social justice struggles.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, SOCI 1F90.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in CHYS 3P38.
#WGST 2P51
Sociology of Gender
(also offered as CRIM 2P51 and SOCI 2P51)
Sociological approaches to gendered social structures, social relations and identities. Topics may include historical and cross-cultural perspectives on gender, the gendering of social institutions and everyday lives, and struggles for gender equality.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or SOCI 1F90.
#WGST 2P56
Gender in Modern European History
(also offered as HIST 2P56)
Men's and women's roles and experiences, and changing notions of femininity and masculinity, from the French Revolution to the present day. Intersection of gender with citizenship, nationalism, imperialism, class, work, education and war.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#WGST 2P61
Women in the Ancient World
(also offered as CLAS 2P61)
Women's social roles, environment and legal rights including conceptions of the female and ideals of women. Consideration given to women from other parts of the Mediterranean such as Etruria, Egypt and the Near East, focusing on women in Greek and Roman society. Emphasis on the nature and limitations of the various types of evidence.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
*WGST 2P86
Women, Gender and the Economy
(also offered as CANA 2P86, LABR 2P86 and SOCI 2P86)
Women in the Canadian labour market. Topics include allocation of time between the household and labour market, gender segregation in the work place, how earnings are determined, causes of occupational and earning difference by gender, role of investment in education and discrimination, recent developments in the labour market and their impact on women and men, and selected policy issues.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits and a minimum 65 percent overall average.
Note: may be offered online.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ECON 2P86.
*WGST 2P90
Women and Gender: Sexuality, Class, Ethnicity
(also offered as SOCI 2P90)
Diverse theoretical perspectives on the production of gender through the intersection of sexuality, class, ethnicity and other expressions of social inequality. Classic feminist perspectives will be applied to these issues and related social policies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), SOCI (single or combined) majors, WGST, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
WGST 2P91
Historical Perspectives on Women and Gender
Important topics in women's history, and disparate understandings of gender, from the 14 to mid-20 centuries focusing on Britain and North America. Topics may include work, eugenics, suffrage, sexuality, witchcraft, education, immigration and colonization.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
*WGST 2P92
Gender and Violence
(also offered as CHYS 2P92)
Feminist sociological examination of various issues related to gender and violence across the lifespan. Topics may include intersectional analyses of dominant social systems of power and violence; rape culture, structural forms of gender-based violence; war, militarization and the gendered dimensions of serial murder.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
*WGST 2P93
Beauty, Bodies and Cultures
(also offered as KINE 2P93 and SOCI 2P93)
Intersectional examination of the social constructions of beauty and the regulation of bodies in historical and contemporary periods, as well as in global and national contexts. Topics may include fashion, fitness and cosmetic industries, eating disorders, representation of racialized others, plastic surgery and genital surgeries.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST 3P03 (SOCI) 3P03.
*WGST 2P95
Masculinities: A Feminist Perspective
(also offered as CHYS 2P95 and SPMA 2P95)
Masculinities and the relation between multiple dimensions of social relations and inequalities across the lifespan: gender, race/ethnicity, class and sexual orientation. How masculinities are produced in varied sport, social, historical and cultural sites.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Note: may be offered online.
*WGST 2P96
Women, Gender and Development
(also offered as LABR 2P96 and SOCI 2P96)
Theoretical paradigms of development (economic development, sustainable development and women/gender in development) and the debates surrounding them.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P96.
WGST 2P98
Sexuality Studies: Foundations
Introduction to the transdisciplinary fields of knowledge in 'sexuality studies'. Exploration of cultural, economic, historical, legal, health and political approaches to sexuality emphasizing the intersections of class, gender, gender identity, race, age, ethnicity, nationality and religion across the lifespan.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
*WGST 2P99
Gender in Canada: Global Contexts
(also offered as SOCI 2P99)
Impact of government policies on society as a result of neoliberal globalization. Topics may include Indigenous rights, migrant workers, reproductive justice, gendered racism, and activist movements for change.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2P99.
*WGST 2Q90
Parenting: 'Family', Images, Issues and Patterns
(also offered as CHYS 2Q90 and SOCI 2Q90)
Parenting as it is theorized/analyzed in interdisciplinary feminist scholarship and portrayed in fictional or autobiographical writings and art forms. The historical, socio-cultural, sexual and political construction of gender and families.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
*WGST 2Q91
Black Women Writing Resistance
(also offered as ENGL 2Q91)
Intersections and interconnections of Black Womens writing and Black Feminist/Womanist thought in the African Diasporas. Critical consideration of Black womens art as mobilizing for survival, placing texts in respective historical, social and political contexts.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits
#WGST 2Q92
Work, Equity and Diversity
(also offered as LABR 2Q92)
How various inequalities, such as those based on gender, race, ethnicity, nation, sexuality, ability and citizenship status, are reproduced and resisted in workplaces, workers' organizations, employment policy, and projects of social change.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#WGST 2Q93
Women in North America to 1865
(also offered as HIST 2Q93)
Major themes in the history of women in Canada and the United States: native and European women in New France and British North America; women in the American Revolution; the lives of enslaved women; women and industrialization; women in the west; and social reform.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#WGST 2Q94
Women in North America, 1865 to the Present
(also offered as HIST 2Q94)
Major themes in the history of women in Canada and the United States: emancipation; industrialization and immigration; suffrage and social movements; gender, race and ethnicity; women and the two world wars; and feminism in the 1960s and 1970s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
#WGST 2Q95
Queer Stories in Italy and the West
(also offered as ITAL 2Q95)
Expression and treatment of sexual and gender diversity in Italy through theories of gender and sexuality, literature, theatre, and film. Themes include colonialism, activism, migration, and the tensions within Italys social movements. Exploration of topics through comparisons and connections between Italy and other parts of the Western world.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits or permission of instructor.
Note: given in English
*WGST 2Q96
Art of Activism: Sexuality to Racial Justice
(also offered as COMM 2Q96, FILM 2Q96, PCUL 2Q96 and VISA 2Q96)
Introduction to the ways marginalized and criminalized populations employ the arts of social change. Topics may include feminist activism, migrant rights, defunding the police and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Artists, film makers and activists in Canada will be featured.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Note: may be offered online.
*WGST 2Q99
Women, Gender and Literature
(also offered as ENGL 2Q99)
Feminist perspectives on representations of women, gender and writing, focusing on Western and/or World Literature.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 4.0 overall credits.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in INTC 2Q99.
#WGST 2V20-2V29
Studies in Writing by Women
(also offered as ENGL 2V20-2V29)
Selected topics in women's writing.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90, one ENGL credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
WGST 2V90-2V99
Selected Topics in Women's Studies
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or 2P00.
WGST 3F95
Practicum: Living a Feminist Life
Theoretically grounded engagement with practical work relevant to feminism, activism and research.
Lectures, 6 hours alternating weeks; community placements.
Note: placements with non-profit community groups supplemented with in-class readings and research. The placement matching process begins in the summer, students are expected to check their Brock email accounts regularly.
WGST 3M00-3M10
Special Topics in Women's Studies
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 2P90 or permission of the instructor.
WGST 3P00
Gender Justice and Resistance
Social and political movements leading to gender justice in Canada. Historical analysis of struggles for equity and justice focusing on 1950 to the present. Topics may include political participation, activist social movements, reproductive justice, re-defining family and equity in labour market participation. A comparative approach may be taken.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.5 overall credits.
#WGST 3P08
Gender and Art
(also offered as VISA 3P08)
Gender and identity politics in art and visual culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): VISA 1Q98 and 1Q99 (minimum 60 percent) or permission of the instructor.
Note: field trips may be required. Students are expected to pay their own expenses.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in STAC 3P08.
#WGST 3P20
Queer Communities and Popular Culture
(also offered as CRIM 3P20 and SOCI 3P20)
Growth of queer communities and their influence on popular print, audio and visual media. Topics include gay, lesbian, bisexual, two-spirited and transgendered (glbtt) influence on contributions to a wide range of culture including film, fashion, sport, theatre and cyberspace.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or SOCI 1F90.
#WGST 3P25
Land, Body and Sovereignty - Indigenous Perspectives
(also offered as INDG 3P25)
Indigenous understanding of the interconnections between land, Indigenous sovereignty, and the ability to exercise sovereignty over one's body. Taught in accordance with Indigenous ways of knowing and doing, this course involves land-based learning that require students to be outside and/or visiting community sites.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, one INDG (ABST) credit or permission of the instructor,
#WGST 3P38
Sociology of Gender, Families and Care
(also offered as SOCI 3P38)
Sociological approaches to the changing practices and institutions of motherhood and fatherhood. Gendered issues of paid labour, social reproduction and care work, global care chains, and social policy.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or SOCI 1F90.
Note: SOCI 2P51 is recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST (LABR/SOCI) 3P30.
WGST 3P41
Directed Studies I
Guided reading on a topic not covered in regular course offerings.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the Director.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. A faculty supervisor must be confirmed prior to registration.
WGST 3P42
Directed Studies II
Guided reading on a topic not covered in regular course offerings.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits and permission of the Director.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. A faculty supervisor must be confirmed prior to registration.
#WGST 3P44
Gender and Sexuality in Childhood and Youth
(also offered as CHYS 3P44 and SOCI 3P44)
Historical, cross-cultural, and sociological approaches to the development of gender identities and sexuality amongst children and adolescents. Topics include the role of families, schools, peers and state policies.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), SOCI (single or combined) majors and minors until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to WGST (single or combined), CHYS (single or combined), CHYS BA (Honours)/BEd (Primary/Junior), SOCI (single or combined) majors, GHUM, SOSC students, WGST, CHYS, CRAS and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 2P90, 2P91, CHYS 2P38, SOCI 2P00 (2P13) and 2P11, 2P38.
#WGST 3P45
Sociology of African Canadians
(also offered as CRIM 3P45 and SOCI 3P45)
Sociological perspectives and issues in the lives of African Canadians. Topics may include contemporary and historical immigration patterns, slavery, criminal justice, family, gender analysis, racism, sexual identity, labour, the civil rights movement, desegregation, Diasporan debates, and contributions in arts and science. Addresses men's and women's issues equally.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or SOCI 1F90
#WGST 3P47
Indigenous Women's Literature: Activism and Empowerment
(also offered as INDG 3P47)
Stories embedded within the literature as they apply to contemporary settings. Exploration of the power of Indigenous women's writing as a political and educational tool.
Seminar, 3 hour per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3P47.
#WGST 3P51
Gender and Society
(also offered as CRIM 3P51 and SOCI 3P51)
Sociological approaches to gender as an organizing principle in society. Topics may include Canadian and global perspectives on the structuring of masculinities, femininities and other genders, gendered economies, gendered politics, gendered families, and gendered popular culture.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, SOCI 1F90.
#WGST 3P60
Gender Issues in Teaching and Learning
(also offered as EDUC 3P60)
Theoretical and practical aspects of feminist engagement with pedagogic processes within/against both traditional and alternative educational contexts; examination of levels and components of education from a variety of feminist theoretical perspectives; pedagogic and political consequences of ideology critique and alternative practices.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 6.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90, 2P00 or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 3P61
Gender and Society in Ancient Mediterranean Cultures
(also offered as CLAS 3P61 and HIST 3P61)
Ancient constructions of femininity and masculinity and their relationships to the social, political and legal systems of the Greco-Roman world. Cultural regions vary.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P61, CLAS 1P91, 1P92, HIST 1P98, 1P99 or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 3P62
The Ancient Household
(also offered as CLAS 3P62)
Social structure, gender and class roles, religious rituals; Mediterranean domestic space and community relationships, urban infrastructure and social networks.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week
Prerequisite(s): one credit from WGST 1F90, 2P61, CLAS 1P91, 1P92.
#WGST 3P63
Contemporary Feminist Philosopy
(also offered as PHIL 3P63)
Feminist thinkers and philosophical debates which inform contemporary feminist theory including, but not limited to, questions of race, class, gender/sex, power and post-colonialism. Thinkers include Alcoff, Butler, de Beauvoir, Code, Chodorow, Fraser, Gilligan, Harding, Hartsock, Irigaray, Kristeva, MacKinnon and Spivak.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one WGST credit, one PHIL credit, or permission of the instructor.
*WGST 3P68
Gender and Health: Local and Global Issues
(also offered as CHYS 3P68 and HLSC 3P68)
Issues relating to women, gender and health and wellness from a critical feminist perspective. Themes on social and political contexts concerning women, girls, genders and health; social and environmental issues affecting health and illness; personal and cultural meanings of health and the body.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 6.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, CHYS 1F90, HLSC 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online.
#WGST 3P71
Gender and Politics
(also offered as POLI 3P71)
Theoretical and practical issues in the relation among gender, sex and politics, such as sexual equality, and its nature and implications for public and private life.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 3P72
Women in Politics
(also offered as POLI 3P72)
Women's participation and influence in the political institutions, processes and policies of modern states emphasizing contemporary Canada.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 3P80
Environmental Justice
(also offered as CRIM 3P80 and SOCI 3P80)
Historical review of the relation between environment and human societies from various theoretical perspectives. Inequalities and social justice struggles. Topics may include sustainability, biodiversity, eco-tourism, population, consumerism and environmental management.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or SOCI 1F90.
#WGST 3P81
Indigenous Mothering and Motherhood: Historical and Contemporary Realities
(also offered as INDG 3P81 and SOCI 3P81)
Indigenous ideologies of mothering and motherhood from a variety of perspectives. Historical mothering practices and family structures highlighting unique roles of Indigenous women in many communities. Contemporary understandings of Indigenous ideologies of motherhood.
Lectures/seminar, 3 hours per week.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 3P80.
#WGST 3P82
Gender, Crime and Justice
(also offered as CRIM 3P82 and SOCI 3P82)
Feminist criminological theory and selected topics on crime, prisons and the Canadian criminal justice system as they pertain to women. Topics may include female crime rates, violence by and against women, prostitution, drug use, girl gangs, women's prisons, women police officers, women in the security sector, women and terrorism, and Domestic Violence Courts.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), SOCI (single or combined) and CRIM majors, WGST, CRAS, CRIM and SOCI minors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
#WGST 3P86
Indigenous Peoples in Global Perspective
(also offered as CRIM 3P86, INDG 3P86 and SOCI 3P86)
Contemporary debates in global Indigenous movements, including the legacy of colonization, land dispossession, cultural appropriation and new developments in the areas of environmental justice, cultural revival and political sovereignty.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, one INDG (ABST) credit, SOCI 1F90 or permission of Department of Sociology Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SOCI (INDG) 3P46 and ABST 3P86.
*WGST 3P92
Advanced Seminar in Eco-Feminism
(also offered as SOCI 3P92)
Different perspectives that connect or disconnect the oppression of women with the oppression of nature.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, SOCI 1F90.
#WGST 3P93
Gender and Language
(also offered as LING 3P93)
Role of language in the construction and maintenance of contemporary masculinities and femininities.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
WGST 3P95
Sexualities and Health: Critical Perspectives
Feminist and trans-disciplinary perspectives on sexualities and community health Topics may include reproductive justice, LGBTQ access to healthcare, debates on sex education, HIV/AIDS policy, global sex work, sexual and gender based violence, cross-cultural translations of queer theory, and movements for sexual justice.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 8.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 3P97
Gender and Cinema to the 1960s
(also offered as COMM 3P97, FILM 3P97 and PCUL 3P97)
Representation of gender, sexuality, race, and class, and implications of spectatorship and ideology.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week, plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of, one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above, FILM 2P90 (2F90), FILM 2P20 and 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 3P98
Gender and Contemporary Cinema
(also offered as COMM 3P98, FILM 3P98 and PCUL 3P98)
Representation of gender and sexuality, race and class via ideology, feminism, queer theory, and spectatorship in film and video texts since the 1960s.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week, plus weekly screening.
Prerequisite(s): one of, one-half WGST credit numbered 2(alpha)90 or above, FILM 2P90 (2F90), PCUL 2P20 and 2P21 or permission of the instructor.
*WGST 3Q90
Indigenous Cultural Production and Activism
(also offered as COMM 3Q90, DART 3Q90, INDG 3Q90, PCUL 3Q90 and SOCI 3Q90)
Draws on cultural, experiential and theoretical texts to better understand Indigenous epistemologies. Examples include ImagineNative and community arts projects.
Lectures, fieldwork, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, COMM 1F90, one INDG (ABST) credit, PCUL 1F92, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: students are expected to pay their own expenses.
#WGST 3Q92
Care Work and Intimate Labours
(also offered as LABR 3Q92)
Care work and other intimate labours including child care, elder care, domestic work and sex work. Examination of how relations of gender, race and class structure care work. Topics may include social reproduction, migration, global care chains, the welfare state and care workers' organizing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
WGST 3Q93
Black Feminist Memory to Black Lives Matter
Introduction to feminist genealogies of the Black Diaspora. A transdisciplinary exploration of theories, praxes of memory, identity formation, and performance of collective remembrance. Topics may include trauma and memory; Black women in the archive; indigeneity; intersectionality; nation and the politics of location; radical relationality in contemporary contexts, such as Black Lives Matter.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, SOCI 1F90, or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 3Q95
Sex Work and Sex Workers
(also offered as LABR 3Q95, POLI 3Q95 and SOCI 3Q95)
Examination of sex work, various theoretical perspectives on sex work and their social policy implications for sex workers. Topics may include prostitution, pornography, the political economy of sex work and sex worker union organizing.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, one POLI credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
Note: may be offered on-site, online or blended.
*WGST 3Q97
Indigenous Feminisms
(also offered as INDG 3Q97 and SOCI 3Q97)
Re-conceptualizes feminisms within a transnational Indigenous framework. Topics include debates within Indigenous knowledge production, analyses of genders and sexualities, violence, poverty, the politics of reproduction, cultural identities, media, and environmental and social justice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, one INDG (ABST) credit, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST (INDG/SOCI) 2P97.
#WGST 3Q98
Indigenous Peoples in North America
(also offered as CRIM 3Q98, INDG 3Q98 and SOCI 3Q98)
Contemporary struggles for cultural survival, land, self-determination and rights in the context of colonialism in North America. Diversity of Indigenous peoples, including their internal debates and divides.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 7.0 overall credits or 2.0 SOCI credits above SOCI 1F90.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, one INDG (INDG) credit, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previously assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST (ABST/SOCI) 3P76, ABST 3Q98 and SOCI (INDG) 3P46 .
WGST 3Q99
International Field Course
Transdisciplinary survey of intersectional feminist and post-colonial theory contextualized by international study abroad experiences. Emphasis on ethical praxis through engaged critical pedagogy.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, 2P00, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: takes place at different field sites from May through August for minimum of 2 weeks duration.Students are responsible for travel, accommodation and other expenses.
#WGST 3V20-3V29
Advanced Studies in Writing by Women
(also offered as ENGL 3V20-3V29)
Selected topics in women's writing at an advanced theoretical and methodological level.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 and one-half credit from WGST 2V90-2V99, two ENGL credits numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or above or permission of the instructor.
WGST 3V90-3V99
Special Topics in Women's Studies
Topics selected on the basis of faculty expertise.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 2P90.
WGST 4F99
Honours Thesis
Research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty adviser.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined) majors with a minimum of 14.0 overall credits, a minimum 75 percent major average, minimum 70 percent overall average, approval to Year 4 (honours) and permission of the Director.
Note: students contemplating a thesis should consult the Director at the end of year 3 and must submit a detailed proposal in writing before May 15, prior to entering year 4.
#WGST 4P01
Latin American Women's Perspectives
(also offered as SPAN 4P01)
Cultural production of Latin American women and their impact on society through a wide selection of media.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
#WGST 4P22
Education and Equity
(also offered as SOCI 4P22)
Selected issues in education in Canada and globally. Topics may include access, representation, experience, and careers of students, teachers and faculty; student cultures; student supervision; efforts to alter pedagogy and curriculum; and implications of globalization.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Note: SOCI 2P22 recommended. May be offered on-site, online or blended.
#WGST 4P31
Women, Work and Leadership
(also offered as LABR 4P31 and SOCI 4P31)
Analysis of women's and feminist leadership theory and praxis through the lens of paid and unpaid work, combined with the development of students' own leadership skills through experiential learning opportunities.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), LABR (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, one LABR credit numbered 1(alpha)90 to 1(alpha)99, SOCI 1F90.
#WGST 4P32
Sociology of Work
(also offered as LABR 4P32 and SOCI 4P32)
Theoretical and research developments in the sociology of work. Topics may include the impact of technological innovation on the labour process, reconceptualizations of work and leisure, changes in the gendered nature of work, role of the contemporary labour movement, and international perspectives on labour and the labour force.
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), LABR (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): two LABR or SOCI credits or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
Note: SOCI 2P32 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit earned in SOCI (LABR) 4F30.
#WGST 4P35
Gendered Patterns of Resistance and Survival
(also offered as LABR 4P35 and SOCI 4P35)
Examination of the ways in which women and men, separately and together, seek to resist and survive the social and economic turmoil of the early 21st century. Focus on individuals, families and communities, and resistance in the context of global economic reorganization. Topics may include case studies in the Niagara Peninsula.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), LABR (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
WGST 4P41
Directed Studies III
Guided reading on a topic not covered in the regular course offerings.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits and permission of the Director.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. A faculty supervisor must be confirmed prior to registration.
WGST 4P42
Directed Studies IV
Guided reading on a topic not covered in the regular course offerings.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 12.0 overall credits and permission of the Director.
Note: topics must be chosen in consultation with a faculty member willing to supervise the tutorial. A faculty supervisor must be confirmed prior to registration.
#WGST 4P43
Gender, Leisure and Families
(also offered as RECL 4P43)
Feminist analysis on the relationship between gender, leisure and the family. Gendered aspects of leisure explored in a variety of social and cultural contexts, including families, informal and social settings, organized leisure, and the media. Issues of resistance and reconstruction of gender relations and leisure as a form of political practice.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 13.5 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90, RECL 3P11 or permission of the instructor.
Note: may be offered online or in a blended format.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST (RECL) 3P43.
#WGST 4P48
Science, Technology and Gender
(also offered as HIST 4P48)
Science and technology as by cultural perceptions of gender. How has gender influenced ideas of nature, determined the scientific inquiry and influenced the path of technological innovation?
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to HIST (single or combined) and HIST (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior) and WGST (single or combined) majors with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department until date specified in Registration guide. After that date open to students with approval to year 4 (honours) and permission of the Department.
Prerequisite(s): one HIST credit numbered 2(alpha)00 to 2(alpha)99 or permission of the instructor.
#WGST 4P51
Gender and Society
(also offered as CRIM 4P51 and SOCI 4P51)
Selected issues in gender and society. Topics may include feminist theories, work, family, state, popular culture, race, militarism and violence.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined) CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): two WGST or SOCI credits or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
Note: WGST 3P51 recommended.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST (SOCI) 4F50.
#WGST 4P53
Masculinities, Culture and Economy
(also offered as CRIM 4P53, LABR 4P53 and SOCI 4P53)
Theoretical and empirical issues of the relation between masculinities and cultural and economic processes and structures. May include ethnicity, racialization, sexuality, nationalism, popular culture, leisure, changes in work and the labour market, class formation, and regional identity.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), CRIM, LABR (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): two SOCI credits or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
#WGST 4P60
Women in Hispanic Literature: Witches, Vampires and Virgins
(also offered as SPAN 4P60)
Depiction of women as monstrous or deviant. Authors include Carmen Boullosa, Alejandra Pizarnick and Rosario Ferr. Feminist literary theory of alterity (otherness).
Lectures, seminar, 3 hours per week.
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Note: given in English.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in SPAN 4V60.
#WGST 4P76
Indigenous Social and Political Thought
(also offered as CRIM 4P76, INDG 4P76 and SOCI 4P76)
History and contemporary literatures on Indigenous epistemologies, the political philosophy of movements for decolonization, environmental sustainability, and Indigenous writing on gendered justice and cultural resurgence in a globalizing world emphasizing writings by Indigenous scholars.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined) CRIM and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): one of two WGST credits, one INDG (INDG) credit, two SOCI credits or permission of the Department of Sociology Administrator.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in ABST 4P76.
WGST 4P90
Advanced Seminar in Feminist Thought and Activism
Theories and activism associated with gender, justice and equity.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST 3P90.
WGST 4P91
Feminist Research: Negotiating Evidence and Facts in a Post-Truth Era
Translation of multi-disciplinary feminist theories into research approaches and social change. Topics may include ethics, reflexivity, intersectionality, situated knowledges, data collection and data analysis, feminist and Indigenous methodologies and epistemologies, visual and narrative methodologies, arts-based methodologies, and the practice of writing compelling research narratives.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: students must have a minimum of 10.0 overall credits.
Prerequisite(s): one of WGST 1F90, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
Completion of this course will replace previous assigned grade and credit obtained in WGST 3P91.
#WGST 4P95
Gender and Sport
(also offered as KINE 4P95)
Historical and current issues informed by gender studies, theories and politics. The shaping of experiences through the practices of sport and gender.
Lectures, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined), BKin, BPhEd, BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Intermediate/Senior), BPhEd (Honours)/BEd (Junior/Intermediate) and BSc (Kin) and majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have a minimum of 13.0 overall credits.
#WGST 4Q41
Social Policy
(also offered as CRIM 4Q41 and SOCI 4Q41)
Canadian and comparative social policy issues, with a focus on gender and political economy. Topics may include the sociological political economy of advanced welfare states, welfare state typologies, social and income equalities in policy formation and delivery, federalism, family policy and tax policy.
Seminar, 3 hours per week.
Restriction: open to WGST (single or combined) and SOCI (single or combined) majors until date specified in Registration guide. Students must have approval to year 4 (honours).
Prerequisite(s): WGST 1F90, SOCI 1F90 or permission of the instructor.
WGST 4V50-4V69
Special Topics in Women's Studies
Selected topics in faculty member's area of expertise.
Administrative Assistant
Elizabeth Wasylowich
905-688-5550, extension 4330
Mackenzie Chown D 411
Academic Advisor
Ferdinand Reimmer
freimmer@brocku.ca
Women's and Gender Studies is an interdisciplinary field of study distinguished by its focus on the experiences of a range of different women, - past and present - and analyses of gender. Women's and Gender Studies courses invite both male and female students to explore the interplay of gender and power, with careful attention to the intersections of race, class, sexuality, colonialism and imperialism.
Women's and Gender Studies students engage with women's texts and cultural artifacts, examine national and international gender politics and activism, experience innovative teaching, and develop skills in feminist theory and research methods. Students of Women's and Gender Studies are well equipped to bring a critical analysis to a range of careers including those in education, business and management, law, health, government and social services.
The Women's and Gender Studies program aims to provide a supportive and intellectually challenging environment to women in the university and it maintains active links to women's organizations in the community. The Centre for Women's and Gender Studies is dedicated to the memory of the fourteen women students whose deaths in 1989 at the cole Polytechnique dramatized the need for a greater understanding of systemic and structural violence against women both locally and globally.